**The Project Gutenberg Etext of the 1994 CIA World Factbook**

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The 1994 Edition of the CIA World Factbook

November, 1994  [Etext #180]


**The Project Gutenberg Etext of the 1994 CIA World Factbook**
*****This file should be named world94.txt or world94.zip*****

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, world941.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, world94a.txt

We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar, then we produce 2
million dollars per hour this year we, will have to do four text
files per month:  thus upping our productivity from one million.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is 10% of the expected number of computer users by the end
of the year 2001.

We need your donations more than ever!

All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/IBC", and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ("IBC" is Illinois
Benedictine College).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go
to IBC, too)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Michael S. Hart, Executive
Director:
hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu (internet)   hart@uiucvmd   (bitnet)

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext91
or cd etext92
or cd etext93 [for new books]  [now also in cd etext/etext93]
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
get INDEX100.GUT
get INDEX200.GUT
for a list of books
and
get NEW.GUT for general information
and
mget GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Illinois Benedictine College (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Illinois
     Benedictine College" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Illinois Benedictine College".

This "Small Print!" by Charles B. Kramer, Attorney
Internet (72600.2026@compuserve.com); TEL: (212-254-5093)
*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*


To search for information on a specific country from the list below,
search for @country:  @Afganistan, for example.  You can also search
directly for one of the categories of that country as follows:

@Afghanistan, Geography
@Afghanistan, People
@Afghanistan, Government
@Afghanistan, Economy
@Afghanistan, Communications
@Afghanistan, Defense Forces


*The Project Gutenberg Edition of the 1994 CIA World Factbook*

Central Intelligence Agency 
 
The World Factbook 1994 
 
US Government officials should obtain copies of The World Factbook directly from 
their own organization or through liaison channels from the Central Intelligence 
Agency. This publication is also available in microfiche, magnetic tape, or 
diskettes for microcomputers. 
 
This publication may be purchased by telephone (VISA or MasterCard) or mail 
from: 
Superintendent of Documents 
P.O. Box 371954 
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 
Telephone: (202) 783-3238 
 
A subscription to this publication may be purchased from: 
Document Expediting (DOCEX) Project 
Exchange and Gift Division 
Library of Congress 
Washington, DC 20540 
Telephone: (202) 707-9527 
 
This publication may be purchased in printed form, photocopy, microfiche,  
magnetic tape, or diskettes for microcomputers from: 
National Technical Information Service 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161 
Telephone: (703) 487-4650 
 
This publication may be purchased in photocopy or microform from:  
Photoduplication Service Library of Congress 
Washington, DC 20540-5234 
Telephone: (202) 707-5640 
 
The World Factbook is produced annually by the Central Intelligence Agency for 
the use of US Government officials, and the style, format, coverage, and content 
are designed to meet their specific requirements. Information was provided by 
the Bureau of the Census, Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence 
Agency, Defense Nuclear Agency, Department of State, Maritime Administration, 
National Science Foundation (Polar Information Program), Naval Maritime 
Intelligence Center, Office of Territorial and International Affairs, US Board 
on Geographic Names, US Coast Guard, and others. 
 
Comments and queries are welcome and may be addressed to: 
Central Intelligence Agency 
Attn.: Office of Public and Agency Information 
Washington, DC 20505 
Telephone: (703) 351-2053 
 
Notes, Definitions, and Abbreviations 
 
A 
Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
American Samoa 
Andorra 
Angola 
Anguilla 
Antarctica 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Arctic Ocean 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Aruba 
Ashmore and Cartier Islands 
Atlantic Ocean 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 
 
B 
Bahamas, The 
Bahrain 
Baker Island 
Bangladesh 
Barbados 
Bassas da India 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Belize 
Benin 
Bermuda 
Bhutan 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Botswana 
Bouvet Island 
Brazil 
British Indian Ocean Territory 
British Virgin Islands 
Brunei 
Bulgaria 
Burkina 
Burma 
Burundi 
 
C 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Cape Verde 
Cayman Islands 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China (also see separate Taiwan entry) 
Christmas Island 
Clipperton Island 
Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
Colombia 
Comoros 
Congo 
Cook Islands 
Coral Sea Islands 
Costa Rica 
Cote d'Ivoire 
Croatia 
Cuba 
Cyprus 
Czech Republic 
 
D 
Denmark 
Djibouti 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 
 
E 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
El Salvador 
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea 
Estonia 
Ethiopia 
Europa Island 
 
F 
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
Faroe Islands 
Fiji 
Finland 
France 
French Guiana 
French Polynesia 
French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
 
G 
Gabon 
Gambia, The 
Gaza Strip 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Gibraltar 
Glorioso Islands 
Greece 
Greenland 
Grenada 
Guadeloupe 
Guam 
Guatemala 
Guernsey 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Guyana 
 
H 
Haiti 
Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
Holy See (Vatican City) 
Honduras 
Hong Kong 
Howland Island 
Hungary 
 
I 
Iceland 
India 
Indian Ocean 
Indonesia 
Iran 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel (also see separate Gaza Strip and West Bank entries) 
Italy 
 
J 
Jamaica 
Jan Mayen 
Japan 
Jarvis Island 
Jersey 
Johnston Atoll 
Jordan (also see separate West Bank entry) 
Juan de Nova Island 
 
K 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Kingman Reef 
Kiribati 
Korea, North 
Korea, South 
Kuwait 
Kyrgyzstan 
 
L 
Laos 
Latvia 
Lebanon 
Lesotho 
Liberia 
Libya 
Liechtenstein 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 
 
M 
Macau 
Macedonia entry follows Thailand 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Maldives 
Mali 
Malta 
Man, Isle of 
Marshall Islands 
Martinique 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mayotte 
Mexico 
Micronesia, Federated States of 
Midway Islands 
Moldova 
Monaco 
Mongolia 
Montserrat 
Morocco 
Mozambique 
 
N 
Namibia 
Nauru 
Navassa Island 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
Netherlands Antilles 
New Caledonia 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Niue 
Norfolk Island 
Northern Mariana Islands 
Norway 
 
O 
Oman 
 
P 
Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the 
Pacific Ocean 
Pakistan 
Palmyra Atoll 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paracel Islands 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Pitcairn Islands 
Poland 
Portugal 
Puerto Rico 
 
Q 
Qatar 
 
R 
Reunion 
Romania 
Russia 
Rwanda 
 
S 
Saint Helena 
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
San Marino 
Sao Tome and Principe 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia and Montenegro 
Seychelles 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
Solomon Islands 
Somalia 
South Africa 
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
Spain 
Spratly Islands 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Suriname 
Svalbard 
Swaziland 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syria 
 
T 
Taiwan 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania 
Thailand 
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
Togo 
Tokelau 
Tonga 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Tromelin Island 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
Tuvalu 
 
U 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 
 
V 
Vanuatu 
Venezuela 
Vietnam 
Virgin Islands 
 
W 
Wake Island 
Wallis and Futuna 
West Bank 
Western Sahara 
Western Samoa 
World 
 
Y 
Yemen 
 
Z 
Zaire 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe  
 
Appendixes 
A: The United Nations System 
B: Abbreviations for International Organizations and Groups 
C: International Organizations and Groups 
D: Abbreviations for Selected International Environmental Agreements 
E: Selected International Environmental Agreements  
F: Weights and Measures 
G: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names 
 
Reference Maps 
The World 
North America 
Central America and the Caribbean 
South America 
Europe 
Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe 
Middle East 
Africa 
Asia 
Commonwealth of Independent States--European States 
Commonwealth of Independent States--Central Asian States 
Southeast Asia 
Oceania 
Arctic Region 
Antarctic Region 
Standard Time Zones of the World 
 
 
There have been some significant changes in this edition. The format and content 
of the former entries on the Environment have been changed, and two new 
appendixes have been added--Appendix D: Abbreviations for Selected International 
Environmental Agreements and Appendix E:  Selected International Environmental 
Agreements. The name of Macedonia was changed to The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia (FYROM). The gross domestic product (GDP) of most of the developing 
countries is now presented on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis rather than 
on an exchange rate basis. The electronic files used to produce the Factbook 
have been restructured into a database. As a result, the formats of some entries 
in this edition have been changed. Additional changes will occur in the 1995 
Factbook.  
 
Abbreviations: (see Appendix B for abbreviations for international organizations 
and groups and Appendix D for abbreviations for international environmental 
agreements) 
 
avdp. -- avoirdupois 
 
c.i.f. -- cost, insurance, and freight 
 
CY -- calendar year 
 
DWT -- deadweight ton 
 
est. -- estimate 
 
Ex-Im -- Export-Import Bank of the United States 
 
f.o.b. -- free on board 
 
FRG -- Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany); used for information dated 
before 3 October 1990 or CY91 
 
FSU -- former Soviet Union 
 
FY -- fiscal year 
 
FYROM -- The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
 
GDP -- gross domestic product 
 
GDR -- German Democratic Republic (East Germany); used for information dated 
before 3 October 1990 or CY91 
 
GNP -- gross national product 
 
GRT -- gross register ton 
 
GWP -- gross world product 
 
km -- kilometer 
 
kW -- kilowatt 
 
kWh -- kilowatt hour 
 
m -- meter 
 
NA -- not available 
 
NEGL -- negligible 
 
nm -- nautical mile 
 
NZ -- New Zealand 
 
ODA -- official development assistance 
 
OOF -- other official flows 
 
PDRY -- People's Democratic Republic of Yemen [Yemen (Aden) or South Yemen]; 
used for information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91 
 
sq km -- square kilometer 
 
sq mi -- square mile 
 
UAE -- United Arab Emirates 
 
UK -- United Kingdom 
 
US -- United States 
 
USSR -- Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Soviet Union); used for information 
dated before 25 December 1991 
 
YAR -- Yemen Arab Republic [Yemen (Sanaa) or North Yemen]; used for information 
dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91 
 
Administrative divisions: The numbers, designatory terms, and first-order 
administrative divisions are generally those approved by the US Board on 
Geographic Names (BGN). Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on by 
BGN are noted. 
 
Area: Total area is the sum of all land and water areas delimited by 
international boundaries and/or coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of all 
surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or coastlines, excluding 
inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers). Comparative areas are based on 
total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the entire US or one of 
the 50 states. The smaller entities are compared with Washington, DC (178 sq km, 
69 sq mi) or The Mall in Washington, DC (0.59 sq km, 0.23 sq mi, 146 acres). 
 
Birth rate: The average annual number of births during a year per 1,000 
population at midyear; also known as crude birth rate. 
 
Dates of information: In general, information available as of 1 January 1994 was 
used in the preparation of this edition. Population figures are estimates for 1 
July 1994, with population growth rates estimated for calendar year 1994. Major 
political events have been updated through May 1994. 
 
Death rate: The average annual number of deaths during a year per l,000 
population at midyear; also known as crude death rate. 
 
Digraphs: The digraph is a two-letter "country code" that precisely identifies 
every entity without overlap, duplication, or omission. AF, for example, is the 
digraph for Afghanistan. It is a standardized geopolitical data element 
promulgated in the  Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS) 
10-3 by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (US Department of 
Commerce) and maintained by the Office of the Geographer (US Department of 
State). The digraph is used to eliminate confusion and incompatibility in the 
collection, processing, and dissemination of area-specific data and is 
particularly useful for interchanging data between databases. 
 
Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations with 183 
nations, including 177 of the 184 UN members (excluded UN members are Bhutan, 
Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Vietnam, and former Yugoslavia). In addition, the 
US has diplomatic relations with 6 nations that are not in the UN - Holy See, 
Kiribati, Nauru, Switzerland, Tonga, and Tuvalu. 
 
Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official development 
assistance (ODA) and other official flows (OOF). ODA is defined as financial 
assistance which is concessional in character, has the main objective to promote 
economic development and welfare of LDCs. and contains a grant element of at 
least 25%. OOF transactions are also official government assistance, but with a 
main objective other than development and with a grant element less than 25%. 
OOF transactions include official export credits (such as Ex-Im Bank credits), 
official equity and portfolio investment, and debt reorganization by the 
official sector that does not meet concessional terms. Aid is considered to have 
been committed when agreements are initialed by the parties involved and 
constitute a formal declaration of intent. 
 
Entities: Some of the nations, dependent areas, areas of special sovereignty, 
and governments included in this publication are not independent, and others are 
not officially recognized by the US Government. "Nation" refers to a people 
politically organized into a sovereign state with a definite territory. 
"Dependent area" refers to a broad category of political entities that are 
associated in some way with a nation. Names used for page headings are usually 
the short-form names as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names. There are 
266 entities in The World Factbook that may be categorized as follows: 
 
NATIONS 
 
183 -- UN members (excluding both the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; membership status in the UN is still to 
be determined) 
 
7 -- nations that are not members of the UN--Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru, Serbia 
and Montenegro, Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu 
 
OTHER 
 
1 -- Taiwan 
 
DEPENDENT AREAS 
 
6 -- Australia--Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) 
Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island 
 
2 -- Denmark--Faroe Islands, Greenland 
 
16 -- France--Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French Guiana, 
French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands, 
Guadeloupe, Juan de Nova Island, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion, 
Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Tromelin Island, Wallis and Futuna 
 
2 -- Netherlands--Aruba, Netherlands Antilles 
 
3 -- New Zealand--Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau 
 
3 -- Norway--Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard 
 
1 -- Portugal--Macau 
 
16 -- United Kingdom--Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, British 
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey, Hong 
Kong, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, South 
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands 
 
15 -- United States--American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island, Jarvis 
Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa Island, Northern 
Mariana Islands, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau), Palmyra Atoll, 
Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Wake Island 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
6 -- Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands, West Bank, 
Western Sahara 
 
OTHER ENTITIES 
 
4 -- oceans--Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean 
 
1 -- World 
 
266 -- total 
 
Exchange rate: The value of a nation's monetary unit at a given date or over a 
given period of time, as expressed in units of local currency per US dollar and 
as determined by international market forces or official fiat. 
 
Gross domestic product (GDP): The value of all final goods and services produced 
within a nation in a given year. 
 
Gross national product (GNP): The value of all final goods and services produced 
within a nation in a given year, plus income earned abroad, minus income earned 
by foreigners from domestic production. 
 
Gross world product (GWP): The aggregate value of all goods and services 
produced worldwide in a given year. 
 
GNP/GDP methodology: In the "Economy" section, GNP/GDP dollar estimates for the 
great majority of countries are derived from purchasing power parity (PPP) 
calculations rather than from conversions at official currency exchange rates. 
The PPP method normally involves the use of international dollar price weights, 
which are applied to the quantities of goods and services produced in a given 
economy. In addition to the lack of reliable data from the majority of 
countries, the statistician faces a major difficulty in specifying, identifying, 
and allowing for the quality of goods and services. The division of a GNP/GDP 
estimate in local currency by the corresponding PPP estimate in dollars gives 
the PPP conversion rate. On average, one thousand dollars will buy the same 
market basket of goods in the US as one thousand dollars--converted to the local 
currency at the PPP conversion rate--will buy in the other country.  Whereas PPP 
estimates for OECD countries are quite reliable, PPP estimates for developing 
countries are often rough approximations.  The latter estimates are based on 
extrapolation of numbers published by the UN International Comparison Program 
and by Professors Robert Summers and Alan Heston of the University of 
Pennsylvania and their colleagues.  Because currency exchange rates depend on a 
variety of international and domestic financial forces that often have little 
relation to domestic output, use of these rates is less satisfactory for 
calculating GNP/GDP than the PPP method.  In developing countries with weak 
currencies the exchange rate estimate of GNP/GDP in dollars is typically one-
fourth to one-half the PPP estimate.  Furthermore, exchange rates may suddenly 
go up or down by 10% or more because of market forces or official fiat whereas 
real output has remained unchanged.  On 12 January 1994, for example, the 14 
countries of the African Financial Community (whose currencies are tied to the 
French franc) devalued their currencies by 50%.  This move, of course, did not 
cut the real output of these countries by half.  One additional caution: the 
proportion of, say, defense expenditures as a percent of GNP/GDP in local 
currency accounts may differ substantially from the proportion when GNP/GDP 
accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as, for example, when an observer estimates 
the dollar level of Russian or Japanese military expenditures; 
 
Growth rate (population): The annual percent change in the population, resulting 
from a surplus (or deficit) of births over deaths and the balance of migrants 
entering and leaving a country. The rate may be positive or negative. 
 
Illicit drugs: There are five categories of illicit drugs--narcotics, 
stimulants, depressants (sedatives), hallucinogens, and cannabis. These 
categories include many drugs legally produced and prescribed by doctors as well 
as those illegally produced and sold outside medical channels. 
 
Cannabis (Cannabis sativa) is the common hemp plant, which provides 
hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana (pot, 
Acapulco gold, grass, reefer), tetrahydrocannabinol (THC, Marinol), hashish 
(hash), and hashish oil (hash oil). 
 
Coca (Erythroxylon coca) is a bush, and the leaves contain the stimulant 
cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds and 
is used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter. 
 
Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush. 
 
Depressants (sedatives) are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and include 
chloral hydrate, barbiturates (Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital), 
benzodiazepines (Librium, Valium), methaqualone (Quaalude), glutethimide 
(Doriden), and others (Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid). 
 
Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental, emotional, or 
behavioral change in an individual. 
 
Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that results in 
physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an individual. 
 
Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking, self-awareness, and 
emotion. Hallucinogens include LSD (acid, microdot), mescaline and peyote (mexc, 
buttons, cactus), amphetamine variants (PMA, STP, DOB), phencyclidine (PCP, 
angel dust, hog), phencyclidine analogues (PCE, PCPy, TCP), and others 
(psilocybin, psilocyn). 
 
Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis sativa). 
 
Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine. 
 
Mandrax is a synthetic chemical depressant, the same as, or similar to Quaalude. 
 
Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis sativa). 
 
Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer to opium, 
opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium 
(paregoric, parepectolin), morphine (MS-Contin, Roxanol), codeine (Tylenol with 
codeine, Empirin with codeine, Robitussan AC), and thebaine. Semisynthetic 
narcotics include heroin (horse, smack), and hydromorphone (Dilaudid). Synthetic 
narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine (Demerol, Mepergan), methadone 
(Dolophine, Methadose), and others (Darvon, Lomotil). 
 
Opium is the milky exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of the opium poppy. 
 
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) is the source for many natural and 
semisynthetic narcotics. 
 
Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried opium 
poppy. 
 
Qat (kat, khat) is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of catha edulis that is 
chewed or drunk as tea. 
 
Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase energy and activity, 
and include cocaine (coke, snow, crack), amphetamines (Desoxyn, Dexedrine), 
phenmetrazine (Preludin), methylphenidate (Ritalin), and others (Cylert, 
Sanorex, Tenuate). 
 
Infant mortality rate: The number of deaths to infants under one year old in a 
given year per l,000 live births occurring in the same year. 
 
International disputes: This category includes a wide variety of situations that 
range from traditional bilateral boundary disputes to unilateral claims of one 
sort or another. Information regarding disputes over international boundaries 
and maritime boundaries has been reviewed by the Department of State. References 
to other situations involving borders or frontiers may also be included, such as 
resource disputes, geopolitical questions, or irredentist issues. However, 
inclusion does not necessarily constitute official acceptance or recognition by 
the US Government. 
 
Irrigated land: The figure refers to the land area that is artificially supplied 
with water. 
 
Land use: Human use of the land surface is categorized as arable land--land 
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest (wheat, maize, rice);  
permanent crops--land cultivated for crops that are not replanted after each 
harvest (citrus, coffee, rubber);  meadows and pastures--land permanently used 
for herbaceous forage crops; forest and woodland--under dense or open stands of 
trees; and other--any land type not specifically mentioned above (urban areas, 
roads, desert). 
 
Leaders: The chief of state is the titular leader of the country who represents 
the state at official and ceremonial functions but is not involved with the day-
to-day activities of the government. The head of government is the 
administrative leader who manages the day-to-day activities of the government. 
In the UK, the monarch is the chief of state, and the Prime Minister is the head 
of government. In the US, the President is both the chief of state and the head 
of government. 
 
Life expectancy at birth: The average number of years to be lived by a group of 
people all born in the same year, if mortality at each age remains constant in 
the future. 
 
Literacy: There are no universal definitions and standards of literacy. Unless 
otherwise noted, all rates are based on the most common definition--the ability 
to read and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards that individual 
countries use to assess the ability to read and write is beyond the scope of 
this publication. 
 
Maritime claims: The proximity of neighboring states may prevent some national 
claims from being extended the full distance. 
 
Merchant marine: All ships engaged in the carriage of goods. All commercial 
vessels (as opposed to all nonmilitary ships), which excludes tugs, fishing 
vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc.; also, a grouping of merchant ships by 
nationality or register. 
 
Captive register--A register of ships maintained by a territory, possession, or 
colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships owned in the parent 
country; also referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent of an 
internal register. Ships on a captive register will fly the same flag as the 
parent country, or a local variant of it, but will be subject to the maritime 
laws and taxation rules of the offshore territory. Although the nature of a 
captive register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in the parent 
country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be owned abroad. 
The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience register, except that it 
is not the register of an independent state. 
 
Flag of convenience register--A national register offering registration to a 
merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major flags of convenience (FOC) 
attract ships to their register by virtue of low fees, low or nonexistent 
taxation of profits, and liberal manning requirements. True FOC registers are 
characterized by having relatively few of the ships registered actually owned in 
the flag state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used for ships under a 
given set of circumstances, an FOC register is one where the majority of the 
merchant fleet is owned abroad. It is also referred to as an open register. 
 
Flag state--The nation in which a ship is registered and which holds legal 
jurisdiction over operation of the ship, whether at home or abroad. Differences 
in flag state maritime legislation determine how a ship is manned and taxed and 
whether a foreign-owned ship may be placed on the register. 
 
Internal register--A register of ships maintained as a subset of a national 
register. Ships on the internal register fly the national flag and have that 
nationality but are subject to a separate set of maritime rules from those on 
the main national register. These differences usually include lower taxation of 
profits, manning by foreign nationals, and, usually, ownership outside the flag 
state (when it functions as an FOC register). The Norwegian International Ship 
Register and Danish International Ship Register are the most notable examples of 
an internal register. Both have been instrumental in stemming flight from the 
national flag to flags of convenience and in attracting foreign owned ships to 
the Norwegian and Danish flags. 
 
Merchant ship--A vessel that carries goods against payment of freight; commonly 
used to denote any nonmilitary ship but accurately restricted to commercial 
vessels only. 
 
Register--The record of a ship's ownership and nationality as listed with the 
maritime authorities of a country; also, the compendium of such individual 
ships' registrations. Registration of a ship provides it with a nationality and 
makes it subject to the laws of the country in which registered (the flag state) 
regardless of the nationality of the ship's ultimate owner. 
 
Money figures: All money figures are expressed in contemporaneous US dollars 
unless otherwise indicated. 
 
National product: The total output of goods and services in a country in a given 
year. See Gross domestic product (GDP), Gross national product (GNP), and 
GNP/GDP methodology. 
 
Net migration rate: The balance between the number of persons entering and 
leaving a country during the year per 1,000 persons (based on midyear 
population). An excess of persons entering the country is referred to as net 
immigration (3.56 migrants/1,000 population); an excess of persons leaving the 
country as net emigration (-9.26 migrants/1,000 population). 
 
Population: Figures are estimates from the Bureau of the Census based on 
statistics from population censuses, vital statistics registration systems, or 
sample surveys pertaining to the recent past, and on assumptions about future 
trends. Starting with the 1993 Factbook demographic estimates for some countries 
(mostly African) have taken into account the effects of the growing incidence of 
AIDS infections; in 1993 these countries were Burkina, Burundi, Central African 
Republic, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Thailand, and Brazil.  
 
Total fertility rate: The average number of children that would be born per 
woman if all women lived to the end of their childbearing years and bore 
children according to a given fertility rate at each age. 
 
Years: All year references are for the calendar year (CY) unless indicated as 
fiscal year (FY). 
 
Note: Information for the US and US dependencies was compiled from material in 
the public domain and does not represent Intelligence Community estimates. The 
Handbook of International Economic Statistics, published annually in September 
by the Central Intelligence Agency, contains detailed economic information for 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, 
Eastern Europe, the newly independent republics of the former nations of 
Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, and selected other countries. The Handbook can 
be obtained wherever The World Factbook is available.


***THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1994


@Afghanistan, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, between Iran and Pakistan
Map references: 
  Asia, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  647,500 sq km 
land area: 
  647,500 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,529 km, China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km,
  Tajikistan 1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  periodic disputes with Iran over Helmand water rights; Iran supports
  clients in country, private Pakistani and Saudi sources also are
  active; power struggles among various groups for control of Kabul,
  regional rivalries among emerging warlords, traditional tribal
  disputes continue; support to Islamic fighters in Tajikistan's civil
  war; border dispute with Pakistan (Durand Line); support to Islamic
  militants worldwide by some factions
Climate: 
  arid to semiarid; cold winters and hot summers
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged mountains; plains in north and southwest
Natural resources: 
  natural gas, petroleum, coal, copper, talc, barites, sulphur, lead,
  zinc, iron ore, salt, precious and semiprecious stones 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  46% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  39% 
Irrigated land: 
  26,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil degradation; overgrazing; deforestation (much of the remaining
  forests are being cut down for fuel and building materials);
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush mountains (one measured 6.8
  on the Richter scale in 1991); flooding
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
  Conservation
Note: 
  landlocked

@Afghanistan, People

Population: 
  16,903,400 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.45% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.94 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  155.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  44.89 years 
male: 
  45.53 years 
female: 
  44.21 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.27 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Afghan(s) 
adjective: 
  Afghan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Pashtun 38%, Tajik 25%, Uzbek 6%, Hazara 19%, minor ethnic groups
  (Chahar Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others)
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 84%, Shi'a Muslim 15%, other 1% 
Languages: 
  Pashtu 35%, Afghan Persian (Dari) 50%, Turkic languages (primarily
  Uzbek and Turkmen) 11%, 30 minor languages (primarily Balochi and
  Pashai) 4%, much bilingualism
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  29% 
male: 
  44% 
female: 
  14% 
Labor force: 
  4.98 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and animal husbandry 67.8%, industry 10.2%, construction
  6.3%, commerce 5.0%, services and other 10.7% (1980 est.)

@Afghanistan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Islamic State of Afghanistan 
conventional short form: 
  Afghanistan 
local long form: 
  Dowlat-e Eslami-ye Afghanestan 
local short form: 
  Afghanestan 
former: 
  Republic of Afghanistan 
Digraph: 
  AF
Type: 
  transitional government 
Capital: 
  Kabul 
Administrative divisions: 
  30 provinces (velayat, singular - velayat); Badakhshan, Badghis,
  Baghlan, Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr, Helmand, Herat,
  Jowzjan, Kabol, Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar,
  Nangarhar, Nimruz, Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika, Parvan, Samangan, Sar-e
  Pol, Takhar, Vardak, Zabol
note: 
  there may be a new province of Nurestan (Nuristan)
Independence: 
  19 August 1919 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Victory of the Muslim Nation, 28 April; Remembrance Day for Martyrs
  and Disabled, 4 May; Independence Day, 19 August 
Constitution: 
  none
Legal system: 
  a new legal system has not been adopted but the transitional
  government has declared it will follow Islamic law (Shari'a)
Suffrage: 
  undetermined; previously universal, male ages 15-50
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Burhanuddin RABBANI (Interim President July - December 1992;
  President since 2 January 1993); First Vice President Mohammad NABI
  Mohammadi (since NA); First Vice President Mohammad SHAH Fazli (since
  NA); election last held NA December 1992 (next to be held NA December
  1994); results - Burhanuddin RABBANI was elected to a two-year term by
  a national shura, later amended by multi-party agreement to 18 months.
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Gulbuddin HIKMATYAR (since 17 March 1993); First Deputy
  Prime Minister Qutbuddin HELAL (since 17 March 1993); Deputy Prime
  Minister Arsala RAHMANI (since 17 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  a unicameral parliament consisting of 205 members was chosen by the
  shura in January 1993; non-functioning as of June 1993
Judicial branch: 
  an interim Chief Justice of the Supreme Court has been appointed, but
  a new court system has not yet been organized
Political parties and leaders: 
  current political organizations include Jamiat-i-Islami (Islamic
  Society), Burhanuddin RABBANI, Ahmad Shah MASOOD; Hizbi
  Islami-Gulbuddin (Islamic Party), Gulbuddin HIKMATYAR faction; Hizbi
  Islami-Khalis (Islamic Party), Yunis KHALIS faction; Ittihad-i-Islami
  Barai Azadi Afghanistan (Islamic Union for the Liberation of
  Afghanistan), Abdul Rasul SAYYAF; Harakat-Inqilab-i-Islami (Islamic
  Revolutionary Movement), Mohammad Nabi MOHAMMADI;
  Jabha-i-Najat-i-Milli Afghanistan (Afghanistan National Liberation
  Front), Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI; Mahaz-i-Milli-Islami (National Islamic
  Front), Sayed Ahamad GAILANI; Hizbi Wahdat (Islamic Unity Party),
  Abdul Ali MAZARI; Harakat-i-Islami (Islamic Movement), Mohammed Asif
  MOHSENI; Jumbesh-i-Milli Islami (National Islamic Movement), Rashid
  DOSTUM
note: 
  the former ruling Watan Party has been disbanded
Other political or pressure groups: 
  the former resistance commanders are the major power brokers in the
  countryside; shuras (councils) of commanders are now administering
  most cities outside Kabul; ulema (religious scholars); tribal elders
Member of: 
  AsDB, CP, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Abdul RAHIM 
chancery: 
  2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-3770 or 3771 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-3516 
US diplomatic representation: 
  none; embassy was closed in January 1989
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and black, with
  the national coat of arms superimposed in the middle of the white band
  and large Islamic lettering superimposed over the green and white
  bands
Overview: 
  Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked country, highly dependent
  on farming (wheat especially) and livestock raising (sheep and goats).
  Economic considerations have played second fiddle to political and
  military upheavals during more than 14 years of war, including the
  nearly 10-year Soviet military occupation (which ended 15 February
  1989). Over the past decade, one-third of the population fled the
  country, with Pakistan sheltering more than 3 million refugees and
  Iran about 3 million. About 1.4 million Afghan refugees remain in
  Pakistan and about 2 million in Iran. Another 1 million probably moved
  into and around urban areas within Afghanistan. Although reliable data
  are unavailable, gross domestic product is lower than 12 years ago
  because of the loss of labor and capital and the disruption of trade
  and transport.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $243 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  fruits and nuts, handwoven carpets, wool, cotton, hides and pelts,
  precious and semi-precious gems
partners: 
  FSU countries, Pakistan, Iran, Germany, India, UK, Belgium,
  Luxembourg, Czechoslovakia
Imports: 
  $737 million (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  food and petroleum products; most consumer goods
partners: 
  FSU countries, Pakistan, Iran, Japan, Singapore, India, South Korea,
  Germany
External debt: 
  $2.3 billion (March 1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.3% (FY91 est.); accounts for about 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  480,000 kW
production: 
  1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  60 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  small-scale production of textiles, soap, furniture, shoes,
  fertilizer, and cement; handwoven carpets; natural gas, oil, coal,
  copper
Agriculture: 
  largely subsistence farming and nomadic animal husbandry; cash
  products - wheat, fruits, nuts, karakul pelts, wool, mutton
Illicit drugs: 
  an illicit cultivator of opium poppy and cannabis for the
  international drug trade; world's second-largest opium producer after
  Burma (680 metric tons in 1993) and a major source of hashish
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $450 million US assistance provided 1985-1993; USAID will stop all
  programs by mid-1994; the UN provides assistance in the form of food
  aid, immunization, land mine removal, and a wide range of aid to
  refugees and displaced persons
Currency: 
  1 afghani (AF) = 100 puls
Exchange rates: 
  afghanis (Af) per US$1 - 1,900 (January 1994), 1,019 (March 1993), 850
  (1991), 700 (1989-90), 220 (1988-89); note - these rates reflect the
  free market exchange rates rather than the official exchange rates
Fiscal year: 
  21 March - 20 March

@Afghanistan, Communications

Railroads: 
  9.6 km (single track) 1.524-meter gauge from Gushgy (formerly Kushka)
  (Turkmenistan) to Towraghondi and 15.0 km from Termiz (Uzbekistan) to
  Kheyrabad transshipment point on south bank of Amu Darya
Highways: 
total: 
  21,000 km 
paved: 
  2,800 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,650 km; earth 16,550 km (1984)
Inland waterways: 
  total navigability 1,200 km; chiefly Amu Darya, which handles vessels
  up to about 500 metric tons
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products - Uzbekistan to Bagram and Turkmenistan to
  Shindand; natural gas 180 km 
Ports: 
  Shir Khan and Kheyrabad (river ports)
Airports: 
total: 
  42 
usable: 
  35 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  17 
Telecommunications: 
  limited telephone, telegraph, and radiobroadcast services; television
  introduced in 1980; 31,200 telephones; numerous cellular telephones;
  broadcast stations - 5 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 1 satellite earth station

@Afghanistan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  the military still does not yet exist on a national scale; some
  elements of the former Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, National
  Guard, Border Guard Forces, National Police Force (Sarandoi), and
  tribal militias remain intact but are factionalized among the various
  mujahedin and former regime leaders
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,188,036; fit for military service 2,245,196; reach
  military age (22) annually 158,335 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  the new government has not yet adopted a defense budget


@Albania, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, on the Balkan Peninsula between
  Serbia and Montenegro and Greece
Map references: 
  Africa, Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  28,750 sq km 
land area: 
  27,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 720 km, Greece 282 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
  151 km, Serbia and Montenegro 287 km (114 km with Serbia, 173 km with
  Montenegro)
Coastline: 
  362 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks independence from Serbia and
  Montenegro, and the Albanian Government supports the Kosovo position
  politically
Climate: 
  mild temperate; cool, cloudy, wet winters; hot, clear, dry summers;
  interior is cooler and wetter
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains and hills; small plains along coast
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper, timber, nickel 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  21% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  15% 
forest and woodland: 
  38% 
other: 
  22% 
Irrigated land: 
  4,230 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to destructive earthquakes; tsunami occur along southwestern
  coast
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity
Note: 
  strategic location along Strait of Otranto (links Adriatic Sea to
  Ionian Sea and Mediterranean Sea)

@Albania, People

Population: 
  3,374,085 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  IMF, working with Albanian government figures estimates the population
  at 3,120,000 in 1993 and that the population has fallen since 1990
Population growth rate: 
  1.19% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  22.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.32 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -5.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  30 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.4 years 
male: 
  70.42 years 
female: 
  76.61 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.78 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Albanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Albanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Albanian 95%, Greeks 3%, other 2% (Vlachs, Gypsies, Serbs, and
  Bulgarians) (1989 est.)
Religions: 
  Muslim 70%, Greek Orthodox 20%, Roman Catholic 10% 
note: 
  all mosques and churches were closed in 1967 and religious observances
  prohibited; in November 1990, Albania began allowing private religious
  practice
Languages: 
  Albanian (Tosk is the official dialect), Greek 
Literacy: 
  age 9 and over can read and write (1955)
total population: 
  72% 
male: 
  80% 
female: 
  63% 
Labor force: 
  1.5 million (1987)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 60%, industry and commerce 40% (1986)

@Albania, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Albania 
conventional short form: 
  Albania 
local long form: 
  Republika e Shqiperise 
local short form: 
  Shqiperia 
former: 
  People's Socialist Republic of Albania 
Digraph: 
  AL
Type: 
  nascent democracy 
Capital: 
  Tirane 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 districts (rrethe, singular - rreth); Berat, Dibre, Durres,
  Elbasan, Fier, Gjirokaster, Gramsh, Kolonje, Korce, Kruje, Kukes,
  Lezhe, Librazhd, Lushnje, Mat, Mirdite, Permet, Pogradec, Puke,
  Sarande, Shkoder, Skrapar, Tepelene, Tirane, Tropoje, Vlore
Independence: 
  28 November 1912 (from Ottoman Empire)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 28 November (1944; changed by decree on 12 November
  1993)
Constitution: 
  an interim basic law was approved by the People's Assembly on 29 April
  1991; a new constitution was to be drafted for adoption in 1992, but
  is still in process
Legal system: 
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age, universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President of the Republic Sali BERISHA (since 9 April 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers Aleksander Gabriel MEKSI
  (since 10 April 1992) 
Cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
People's Assembly (Kuvendi Popullor): 
  elections last held 22 March 1992; results - DP 62.29%, ASP 25.57%,
  SDP 4.33%, RP 3.15%, UHP 2.92%, other 1.74%; seats - (140 total) DP
  92, ASP 38, SDP 7, RP 1, UHP 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  there are at least 18 political parties; most prominent are the
  Albanian Socialist Party (ASP; formerly the Albania Workers Party),
  Fatos NANO, first secretary; Democratic Party (DP), Eduard SELAMI,
  chairman; Albanian Republican Party (RP), Sabri GODO; Omonia (Greek
  minority party), leader NA (ran in 1992 election as Unity for Human
  Rights Party (UHP)); Social Democratic Party (SDP), Skender GJINUSHI;
  Democratic Alliance Party (DAP), Spartak NGJELA, chairman
Member of: 
  BSEC, CCC, CE (guest), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, NACC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Lublin Hasan DILJA 
chancery: 
  Suite 1010, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 223-4942, 8187 
FAX: 
  (202) 628-7342 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William E. RYERSON 
embassy: 
  Rruga E. Elbansanit 103, Tirane 
mailing address: 
  PSC 59, Box 100 (A), APO AE 09624 
telephone: 
  355-42-32875, 33520 
FAX: 
  355-42-32222 
Flag: 
  red with a black two-headed eagle in the center

@Albania, Economy
Overview: 
  An extremely poor country by European standards, Albania is making the
  difficult transition to a more open-market economy. The economy
  rebounded in 1993 after a severe depression accompanying the collapse
  of the previous centrally planned system in 1990 and 1991.
  Stabilization policies, including public sector layoffs and reduced
  social services, have improved the government's fiscal situation and
  reduced inflation. The recovery was spurred by the remittances of some
  5% of the population which works abroad, mostly in Greece and Italy.
  Foreign assistance and humanitarian aid also supported the recovery.
  Most agricultural land was privatized in 1992, substantially improving
  peasant incomes. Albania's limited industrial sector, now less than
  one-sixth of GDP, continued to decline in 1993. A sharp fall in
  chromium prices reduced hard currency receipts from the mining sector.
  Large segments of the population, especially those living in urban
  areas, continue to depend on humanitarian aid to meet basic food
  requirements. Unemployment remains a severe problem accounting for
  approximately one-fifth of the work force. Growth is expected to
  continue in 1994, but could falter if Albania becomes involved in the
  conflict in the former Yugoslavia, workers' remittances from Greece
  are reduced, or foreign assistance declines.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  11% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $1,100 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  31% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  18% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $70 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $70 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  asphalt, metals and metallic ores, electricity, crude oil, vegetables,
  fruits, tobacco
partners: 
  Italy, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Germany, Greece,
  Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary
Imports: 
  $524 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery, consumer goods, grains
partners: 
  Italy, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Germany,
  Czechoslovakia, Romania, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Greece
External debt: 
  $724 million (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -10% (1993 est.); accounts for 16% of GDP (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,690,000 kW
production: 
  5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,520 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, textiles and clothing, lumber, oil, cement,
  chemicals, mining, basic metals, hydropower
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 55% of GDP; arable land per capita among lowest in
  Europe; 80% of arable land now in private hands; one-half of work
  force engaged in farming; produces wide range of temperate-zone crops
  and livestock
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin transiting the Balkan
  route; limited opium production
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $190 million humanitarian aid; $94 million in loans/guarantees/credits
Currency: 
  1 lek (L) = 100 qintars
Exchange rates: 
  leke (L) per US$1 - 99 (January 1994), 97 (January 1993), 50 (January
  1992), 25 (September 1991)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Albania, Communications

Railroads: 
  543 km total; 509 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, single track and 34
  km narrow gauge, single track (1990); line connecting Titograd (Serbia
  and Montenegro) and Shkoder (Albania) completed August 1986
Highways: 
total: 
  16,700 km 
paved: 
  6,700 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 10,000 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  43 km plus Albanian sections of Lake Scutari, Lake Ohrid, and Lake
  Prespa (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 145 km; petroleum products 55 km; natural gas 64 km (1991)
Ports: 
  Durres, Sarande, Vlore
Merchant marine: 
  11 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 52,967 GRT/76,887 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  12 
usable: 
  10 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  inadequate service; 15,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 13 AM, 1
  TV; 514,000 radios, 255,000 TVs (1987 est.)

@Albania, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Interior Ministry Troops 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 906,938; fit for military service 746,945; reach
  military age (19) annually 33,184 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  215 million leke, NA% of GNP (1993 est.); note - conversion of defense
  expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Algeria, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, along the Mediterranean Sea, between Morocco and
  Tunisia
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,381,740 sq km 
land area: 
  2,381,740 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,343 km, Libya 982 km, Mali 1,376 km, Mauritania 463 km,
  Morocco 1,559 km, Niger 956 km, Tunisia 965 km, Western Sahara 42 km 
Coastline: 
  998 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Libya claims part of southeastern Algeria; land boundary dispute with
  Tunisia settled in 1993
Climate: 
  arid to semiarid; mild, wet winters with hot, dry summers along coast;
  drier with cold winters and hot summers on high plateau; sirocco is a
  hot, dust/sand-laden wind especially common in summer
Terrain: 
  mostly high plateau and desert; some mountains; narrow, discontinuous
  coastal plain
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, uranium, lead, zinc 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  13% 
forest and woodland: 
  2% 
other: 
  82% 
Irrigated land: 
  3,360 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion from overgrazing and other poor farming practices;
  desertification; dumping of untreated sewage, petroleum refining
  wastes, and other industrial effluents is leading to the pollution of
  rivers and coastal waters; Mediterranean Sea, in particular, becoming
  polluted from oil wastes, soil erosion, and fertilizer runoff; limited
  supply of potable water
natural hazards: 
  mountainous areas subject to severe earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban
Note: 
  second-largest country in Africa (after Sudan)

@Algeria, People

Population: 
  27,895,068 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.29% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  29.71 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.22 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.58 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  52.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.68 years 
male: 
  66.63 years 
female: 
  68.77 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Algerian(s) 
adjective: 
  Algerian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab-Berber 99%, European less than 1%
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim (state religion) 99%, Christian and Jewish 1% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), French, Berber dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  57% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  46% 
Labor force: 
  6.2 million (1992 est.)
by occupation: 
  government 29.5%, agriculture 22%, construction and public works
  16.2%, industry 13.6%, commerce and services 13.5%, transportation and
  communication 5.2% (1989)

@Algeria, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria 
conventional short form: 
  Algeria 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Jaza'iriyah ad Dimuqratiyah ash Shabiyah 
local short form: 
  Al Jaza'ir 
Digraph: 
  AG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Algiers 
Administrative divisions: 
  48 provinces (wilayast, singular - wilaya); Adrar, Ain Defla, Ain
  Temouchent, Alger, Annaba, Batna, Bechar, Bejaia, Biskra, Blida, Bordj
  Bou Arreridj, Bouira, Boumerdes, Chlef, Constantine, Djelfa, El
  Bayadh, El Oued, El Tarf, Ghardaia, Guelma, Illizi, Jijel, Khenchela,
  Laghouat, Mascara, Medea, Mila, Mostaganem, M'Sila, Naama, Oran,
  Ouargla, Oum el Bouaghi, Relizane, Saida, Setif, Sidi Bel Abbes,
  Skikda, Souk Ahras, Tamanghasset, Tebessa, Tiaret, Tindouf, Tipaza,
  Tissemsilt, Tizi Ouzou, Tlemcen
Independence: 
  5 July 1962 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Revolution, 1 November (1954) 
Constitution: 
  19 November 1976, effective 22 November 1976; revised 3 November 1988
  and 23 February 1989
Legal system: 
  socialist, based on French and Islamic law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in ad hoc Constitutional Council composed of various
  public officials, including several Supreme Court justices; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Lamine ZEROUAL (since 31 January 1994); next election to be
  held after a three-year transition period which began on 31 January
  1994 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Mokdad SIFI (since 11 April 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National People's Assembly (Al-Majlis Ech-Chaabi Al-Watani):
  elections first round held on 26 December 1991 (second round canceled
  by the military after President BENDJEDID resigned 11 January 1992,
  effectively suspending the Assembly); results - percent of vote by
  party NA; seats - (281 total); the fundamentalist FIS won 188 of the
  231 seats contested in the first round; note - elections (municipal
  and wilaya) were held in June 1990, the first in Algerian history;
  results - FIS 55%, FLN 27.5%, other 17.5%, with 65% of the voters
  participating
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Islamic Salvation Front (FIS, outlawed April 1992), Ali BELHADJ, Dr.
  Abassi MADANI, Abdelkader HACHANI (all under arrest), Rabeh KEBIR
  (self-exile in Germany); National Liberation Front (FLN), Abdelhamid
  MEHRI, Secretary General; Socialist Forces Front (FFS), Hocine Ait
  AHMED, Secretary General
note: 
  the government established a multiparty system in September 1989 and,
  as of 31 December 1990, over 50 legal parties existed
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24,
  G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OAS (observer),
  OAU, OIC, OPEC, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNTAC,
  UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Nourredine Yazid ZERHOUNI 
chancery: 
  2118 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-2800 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mary Ann CASEY 
embassy: 
  4 Chemin Cheikh Bachir El-Ibrahimi, Algiers 
mailing address: 
  B. P. Box 549, Alger-Gare, 16000 Algiers 
telephone: 
  [213] (2) 601-425, 255, 186 
FAX: 
  [213] (2) 603979 
consulate(s): 
  Oran 
Flag: 
  two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and white with a red
  five-pointed star within a red crescent; the crescent, star, and color
  green are traditional symbols of Islam (the state religion)

@Algeria, Economy

Overview: 
  The hydrocarbons sector is the backbone of the economy, accounting for
  roughly 57% of government revenues, 25% of GDP, and almost all export
  earnings; Algeria has the fifth largest reserves of natural gas in the
  world and ranks fourteenth for oil. Algiers' efforts to reform one of
  the most centrally planned economies in the Arab world began after the
  1986 collapse of world oil prices plunged the country into a severe
  recession. In 1989, the government launched a comprehensive,
  IMF-supported program to achieve macroeconomic stabilization and to
  introduce market mechanisms into the economy. Despite substantial
  progress toward macroeconomic adjustment, in 1992 the reform drive
  stalled as Algiers became embroiled in political turmoil. In September
  1993, a new government was formed, one of whose priorities was the
  resumption and acceleration of the structural adjustment process.
  Buffeted by the slump in world oil prices and burdened with a heavy
  foreign debt, Algiers in 1993 resumed negotiations with the IMF and is
  on track to conclude a standby arrangement with the Fund in 1994.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $89 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,300 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  22% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  22% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $14.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $14.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.5 billion (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $11.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum and natural gas 97%
partners: 
  Italy 21%, France 16%, US 14%, Germany 13%, Spain 9%
Imports: 
  $9 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  capital goods 39.7%, food and beverages 21.7%, consumer goods 11.8%
  (1990)
partners: 
  France 29%, Italy 14%, Spain 9%, US 9%, Germany 7%
External debt: 
  $26 billion (1994)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,380,000 kW
production: 
  16.384 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  630 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, light industries, natural gas, mining, electrical,
  petrochemical, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 12.8% of GDP (1993 est.) and employs 22% of labor force;
  products- wheat, barley, oats, grapes, olives, citrus, fruits, sheep,
  cattle; net importer of food - grain, vegetable oil, sugar
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-85), $1.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $925
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $1.8 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $2.7 billion; net official disbursements
  (1985-89), $375 million 
Currency: 
  1 Algerian dinar (DA) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Algerian dinars (DA) per US$1 - 36.008 (April 1994), 23.345 (1993),
  21.836 (1992), 18.473 (1991), 8.958 (1990), 7.6086 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Algeria, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,060 km total; 2,616 km standard gauge (1.435 m), 1,188 km
  1.055-meter gauge, 256 km 1.000-meter gauge; 300 km electrified; 215
  km double track
Highways: 
total: 
  90,031 km 
paved: 
  concrete, bituminous 58,868 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 31,163 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 6,612 km; petroleum products 298 km; natural gas 2,948 km 
Ports: 
  Algiers, Annaba, Arzew, Bejaia, Djendjene, Ghazaouet, Jijel, Mers el
  Kebir, Mostaganem, Oran, Skikda
Merchant marine: 
  75 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 903,179 GRT/1,064,211 DWT, bulk
  9, cargo 27, chemical tanker 7, liquefied gas 9, oil tanker 5,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 12, short-sea passenger 5, specialized tanker 1
Airports: 
total: 
  140 
usable: 
  124 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  53 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  32 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  65 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent domestic and international service in the north, sparse in
  the south; 822,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 26 AM, no FM, 18
  TV; 1,600,000 TV sets; 5,200,000 radios; 5 submarine cables; microwave
  radio relay to Italy, France, Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia; coaxial
  cable to Morocco and Tunisia; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Intersputnik, l ARABSAT,
  and 12 domestic; 20 additional satellite earth stations are planned

@Algeria, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Popular Army, Navy, Air Force, Territorial Air Defense 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,863,378; fit for military service 4,215,767; reach
  military age (19) annually 301,945 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.36 billion, 2.5% of GDP (1993 est.)


@American Samoa

Header

Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@American Samoa, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the South Pacific Ocean, 3,700 km
  south-southwest of Honolulu, about halfway between Hawaii and New
  Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  199 sq km 
land area: 
  199 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Rose Island and Swains Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  116 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds; annual rainfall
  averages 124 inches; rainy season from November to April, dry season
  from May to October; little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  five volcanic islands with rugged peaks and limited coastal plains,
  two coral atolls (Rose Island, Swains Island)
Natural resources: 
  pumice, pumicite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  75% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
rent issues: 
     NA 
ural hazards: 
     typhoons common from December to March
ernational agreements: 
     NA 
Note: 
  Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater harbors in the South
  Pacific Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough seas and protected by
  peripheral mountains from high winds; strategic location in the South
  Pacific Ocean

@American Samoa, People

Population: 
  55,223 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.86% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  36.63 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.01 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.78 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
Total population: 
  72.91 years 
male: 
  71.03 years 
female: 
  74.85 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.36 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  American Samoan(s) 
adjective: 
  American Samoan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Samoan (Polynesian) 89%, Caucasian 2%, Tongan 4%, other 5% 
Religions: 
  Christian Congregationalist 50%, Roman Catholic 20%, Protestant
  denominations and other 30% 
Languages: 
  Samoan (closely related to Hawaiian and other Polynesian languages),
  English; most people are bilingual
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  97% 
Labor force: 
  14,400 (1990)
by occupation: 
  government 33%, tuna canneries 34%, other 33% (1990)

@American Samoa, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of American Samoa 
conventional short form: 
  American Samoa 
Abbreviation: 
  AS
Digraph: 
  AQ
Type: 
  unincorporated and unorganized territory of the US; administered by
  the US Department of Interior, Office of Territorial and International
  Affairs 
Capital: 
  Pago Pago 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of the US)
Independence: 
  none (territory of the US)
National holiday: 
  Territorial Flag Day, 17 April (1900) 
Constitution: 
  ratified 1966, in effect 1967
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January 1993); Vice
  President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993) 
head of government: 
  Governor A. P. LUTALI (since 3 January 1993); Lieutenant Governor
  Tauese P. SUNIA (since 3 January 1993); election last held 3 November
  1992 (next to be held NA November 1996); results - A. P. LUTALI
  (Democrat) 53%, Peter Tali COLEMAN (Republican) 36%
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Legislative Assembly (Fono)
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1994); results - representatives popularly elected from 17 house
  districts; seats - (21 total, 20 elected, and 1 nonvoting delegate
  from Swains Island)
Senate: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1996); results - senators elected by village chiefs from 12 senate
  districts; seats - (18 total) number of seats by party NA
US House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1994); results - Eni R. F. H. FALEOMAVAEGA reelected as delegate
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), INTERPOL (subbureau), IOC, SPC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of the US)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of the US)
Flag: 
  blue with a white triangle edged in red that is based on the fly side
  and extends to the hoist side; a brown and white American bald eagle
  flying toward the hoist side is carrying two traditional Samoan
  symbols of authority, a staff and a war club

@American Samoa, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is strongly linked to the US, with which American
  Samoa conducts 80%-90% of its foreign trade. Tuna fishing and tuna
  processing plants are the backbone of the private sector, with canned
  tuna the primary export. The tuna canneries and the government are by
  far the two largest employers. Other economic activities include a
  slowly developing tourist industry. Transfers from the US Government
  add substantially to American Samoa's economic well-being.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $128 million (1991)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $2,600 (1991)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  12% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $97 million (includes $43,000,000 in local revenue and $54,000,000 in
  grant revenue);
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY91)
Exports: 
  $306 million (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: 
  canned tuna 93%
partners: 
  US 99.6%
Imports: 
  $360.3 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: 
  materials for canneries 56%, food 8%, petroleum products 7%, machinery
  and parts 6%
partners: 
  US 62%, Japan 9%, NZ 7%, Australia 11%, Fiji 4%, other 7%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  42,000 kW
production: 
  100 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,020 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tuna canneries (largely dependent on foreign fishing vessels), meat
  canning, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro, breadfruit, yams, copra,
  pineapples, papayas, dairy farming
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $21,042,650 in operational funds and $1,227,000 in construction funds
  for capital improvement projects from the US Department of Interior
  (1991)
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@American Samoa, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  350 km 
paved: 
  150 km 
unpaved: 
  200 km 
Ports: 
  Pago Pago, Ta'u, Ofu, Auasi, Aanu'u (new construction), Faleosao
Airports: 
total: 
  4 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440 to 3,659 m: 
  1 (international airport at Tafuna)
with runways 1,200 to 2,439 m: 
  0 
note: 
  small airstrips on Fituita and Ofu
Telecommunications: 
  8,399 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV; good telex,
  telegraph, and facsimile services; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station, 1 COMSAT earth station

@American Samoa, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Andorra, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Europe, between France and Spain
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  450 sq km 
land area: 
  450 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 125 km, France 60 km, Spain 65 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; snowy, cold winters and cool, dry summers
Terrain: 
  rugged mountains dissected by narrow valleys
Natural resources: 
  hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore, lead 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  56% 
forest and woodland: 
  22% 
other: 
  20% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  landlocked

@Andorra, People

Population: 
  63,930 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.99% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.34 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.12 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  23.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.37 years 
male: 
  75.5 years 
female: 
  81.5 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.73 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Andorran(s) 
adjective: 
  Andorran 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Spanish 61%, Andorran 30%, French 6%, other 3% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic (predominant)
Languages: 
  Catalan (official), French, Castilian 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Andorra, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Principality of Andorra 
conventional short form: 
  Andorra 
local long form: 
  Principat d'Andorra 
local short form: 
  Andorra 
Digraph: 
  AN
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy (since March 1993) that retains as its heads
  of state a co-principality; the two princes are the president of
  France and Spanish bishop of Seo de Urgel, who are represented locally
  by officials called veguers
Capital: 
  Andorra la Vella 
Administrative divisions: 
  7 parishes (parroquies, singular - parroquia); Andorra, Canillo,
  Encamp, La Massana, Les Escaldes, Ordino, Sant Julia de Loria
Independence: 
     1278 
National holiday: 
  Mare de Deu de Meritxell, 8 September 
Constitution: 
  Andorra's first written constitution was drafted in 1991; adopted 14
  March 1993
Legal system: 
  based on French and Spanish civil codes; no judicial review of
  legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age, universal
Executive branch: 
chiefs of state: 
  French Co-Prince Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981), represented
  by Veguer de Franca Jean Pierre COURTOIS (since NA); Spanish Episcopal
  Co-Prince Mgr. Juan MARTI Alanis (since 31 January 1971), represented
  by Veguer Episcopal Francesc BADIA Bata - two co-princes (President
  Francois MITTERRAND of France, since 21 May 1981, and Bishop of Seo de
  Urgel Juan MARTI Alanis in Spain, since 31 January 1971), two
  designated representatives (France - Veguer de Franca Jean Pierre
  COURTOIS, since NA, and Spain - Veguer Episcopal Francesc BADIA Bata,
  since NA), two permanent delegates (French Prefect Pierre STEINMETZ
  for the department of Pyrenees-Orientales, since NA, and Spanish Vicar
  General Nemesi MARQUES Oste for the Seo de Urgel diocese, since NA)
head of government: 
  Executive Council President Oscar RIBAS Reig (since 10 December 1993)
  elected by Parliament
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; designated by the executive council president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
General Council of the Valleys: 
  (Consell General de las Valls); elections last held 12 December 1993
  (next to be held NA); yielded no clear winner; results - percent of
  vote by party NA; seats - (28 total) number of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Andorra at Perpignan (France) for civil cases, the
  Ecclesiastical Court of the bishop of Seo de Urgel (Spain) for civil
  cases, Tribunal of the Courts (Tribunal des Cortes) for criminal cases
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Democratic Group (AND), Oscar RIBAS Reig and Jordi FARRAS;
  Liberal Union (UL), Francesc CERQUEDA; New Democracy (ND), Jaume
  BARTOMEU; Andorran National Coalition (CNA), Antoni CERQUEDA; National
  Democratic Initiative (IDN), Vincenc MATEU; Liberal Union (UL),
  Francesc CERQUEDA
note: 
  there are two other small parties
Member of: 
  ECE, INTERPOL, IOC, UN 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Andorra has no mission in the US
US diplomatic representation: 
  Andorra is included within the Barcelona (Spain) Consular District,
  and the US Consul General visits Andorra periodically
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red with
  the national coat of arms centered in the yellow band; the coat of
  arms features a quartered shield; similar to the flags of Chad and
  Romania that do not have a national coat of arms in the center

@Andorra, Economy

Overview: 
  Tourism, the mainstay of Andorra's economy, accounts for roughly 80%
  of GDP. An estimated 13 million tourists visit annually, attracted by
  Andorra's duty-free status and by its summer and winter resorts. The
  banking sector, with its "tax haven" status, also contributes
  substantially to the economy. Agricultural production is limited by a
  scarcity of arable land, and most food has to be imported. The
  principal livestock activity is sheep raising. Manufacturing consists
  mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and furniture. Andorra is a member of
  the EU Customs Union; it is unclear what effect the European Single
  Market will have on the advantages Andorra obtains from its duty-free
  status.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $760 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $14,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  0% 
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $138 million 
expenditures: 
  $177 million, Including capital expenditures of $NA (1993)
Exports: 
  $30 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  electricity, tobacco products, furniture
partners: 
  France, Spain
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  consumer goods, food
partners: 
  France, Spain
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  35,000 kW
production: 
  140 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,570 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism (particularly skiing), sheep, timber, tobacco, banking
Agriculture: 
  sheep raising; small quantities of tobacco, rye, wheat, barley, oats,
  and some vegetables
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes; 1 peseta (Pta) = 100 centimos; the
  French and Spanish currencies are used
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989); Spanish
  pesetas (Ptas) per US$1 - 143.04 (January 1994), 127.26 (1993), 102.38
  (1992), 103.91 (1991), 101.93 (1990), 118.38 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Andorra, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  96 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Telecommunications: 
  international digital microwave network; international landline
  circuits to France and Spain; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV;
  17,700 telephones

@Andorra, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France and Spain


@Angola, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean between Namibia
  and Zaire
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,246,700 sq km 
land area: 
  1,246,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,198 km, Congo 201 km, Namibia 1,376 km, Zaire 2,511 km, Zambia
  1,110 km 
Coastline: 
  1,600 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  20 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  semiarid in south and along coast to Luanda; north has cool, dry
  season (May to October) and hot, rainy season (November to April)
Terrain: 
  narrow coastal plain rises abruptly to vast interior plateau
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, copper, feldspar, gold,
  bauxite, uranium 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  23% 
forest and woodland: 
  43% 
other: 
  32% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA km2
Environment: 
current issues: 
  population pressures contributing to overuse of pastures and
  subsequent soil erosion; desertification; deforestation of tropical
  rain forest attributable to the international demand for tropical
  timber and domestic use as a fuel; deforestation contributing to loss
  of biodiversity; soil erosion contributing to water pollution and
  siltation of rivers and dams; scarcity of potable water
natural hazards: 
  locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding on the plateau
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change
Note: 
  Cabinda is separated from rest of country by Zaire

@Angola, People

Population: 
  9,803,576 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.67% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.43 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.55 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  145.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  45.77 years 
male: 
  43.72 years 
female: 
  47.92 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.48 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Angolan(s) 
adjective: 
  Angolan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Ovimbundu 37%, Kimbundu 25%, Bakongo 13%, mestico (mixed European and
  Native African) 2%, European 1%, other 22% 
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 47%, Roman Catholic 38%, Protestant 15% (est.)
Languages: 
  Portuguese (official), Bantu and other African languages 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  42% 
male: 
  56% 
female: 
  28% 
Labor force: 
  2.783 million economically active
by occupation: 
  agriculture 85%, industry 15% (1985 est.)

@Angola, Government

Note: 
  Civil war has been the norm since independence on 11 November 1975; a
  cease-fire lasted from 31 May 1991 until October 1992 when the
  insurgent National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)
  refused to accept its defeat in internationally monitored elections;
  fighting has since resumed throughout much of the countryside.
  Nevertheless, the two sides are negotiating the details for holding
  the second round of presidential elections.
Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Angola 
conventional short form: 
  Angola 
local long form: 
  Republica de Angola 
local short form: 
  Angola 
former: 
  People's Republic of Angola 
Digraph: 
  AO
Type: 
  transitional government nominally a multiparty democracy with a strong
  presidential system
Capital: 
  Luanda 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Bengo, Benguela, Bie,
  Cabinda, Cuando Cubango, Cuanza Norte, Cuanza Sul, Cunene, Huambo,
  Huila, Luanda, Lunda Norte, Lunda Sul, Malanje, Moxico, Namibe, Uige,
  Zaire
Independence: 
  11 November 1975 (from Portugal)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 11 November (1975) 
Constitution: 
  11 November 1975; revised 7 January 1978, 11 August 1980, 6 March
  1991, and 26 August 1992
Legal system: 
  based on Portuguese civil law system and customary law; recently
  modified to accommodate political pluralism and increased use of free
  markets
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS (since 21 September 1979) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Marcolino Jose Carlos MOCO (since 2 December 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assembleia Nacional): 
  first nationwide, multiparty elections were held 29-30 September 1992
  with disputed results; further elections are being discussed
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Tribunal da Relacao) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), led by Jose
  Eduardo DOS SANTOS, is the ruling party and has been in power since
  1975; National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), led
  by Jonas SAVIMBI, remains a legal party despite its return to armed
  resistance to the government; five minor parties have small numbers of
  seats in the National Assembly
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Cabindan State Liberation Front (FLEC), N'ZITA Tiago, leader of
  largest faction (FLEC-FAC)
note: 
  FLEC is waging a small-scale, highly factionalized, armed struggle for
  the independence of Cabinda Province
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC (observer), ECA, FAO, FLS, G-77, IBRD, ICAO,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAS (observer), OAU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jose PATRICIO 
embassy: 
  1899 L Street NW, 5th floor, Washington, DC 20038 
telephone: 
  (202) 785-1156 
FAX: 
  (202) 785-1258 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edmund DE JARNETTE 
embassy: 
  Miramar, Luanda 
mailing address: 
  CP6484, Luanda, Angola (mail international); US Embassy, Luanda,
  Department of State, Washington, D.C. 20521-2550 (pouch) 
telephone: 
  [244] (2) 39-24-98 
FAX: 
  [244] (2) 39-05-15 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and black with a centered
  yellow emblem consisting of a five-pointed star within half a cogwheel
  crossed by a machete (in the style of a hammer and sickle)

@Angola, Economy

Overview: 
  Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 80-90% of the
  population but accounts for less than 15% of GDP. Oil production is
  vital to the economy, contributing about 60% to GDP. Bitter internal
  fighting continues to severely affect the economy, and food must be
  imported. In 1993, production fell by an estimated 22.6%, mainly
  because of the capture by insurgents of the oil town of Soyo and
  diamond-producing areas in northeastern Angola. Angola has rich
  natural resources - notably gold, diamonds, and arable land, in
  addition to large oil depoaits - but will need to end the war and
  reform government policies if it is to achieve its potential.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $5.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -22.6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1,840% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% with considerable underemployment (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $928 million 
expenditures: 
  $2.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $963 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $3 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  oil, diamonds, refined petroleum products, gas, coffee, sisal, fish
  and fish products, timber, cotton
partners: 
  US, France, Germany, Netherlands, Brazil
Imports: 
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  capital equipment (machinery and electrical equipment), food, vehicles
  and spare parts, textiles and clothing, medicines; substantial
  military deliveries
partners: 
  Portugal, Brazil, US, France, Spain
External debt: 
  $8 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for about 60% of GDP, including petroleum
  output
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  510,000 kW
production: 
  800 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  84 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  petroleum; mining - diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, feldspar, bauxite,
  uranium, and gold; fish processing; food processing; brewing; tobacco;
  sugar; textiles; cement; basic metal products
Agriculture: 
  cash crops - bananas, sugar cane, coffee, sisal, corn, cotton, cane,
  manioc, tobacco; food crops - cassava, corn, vegetables, plantains ;
  livestock production accounts for 20%, fishing 4%, forestry 2% of
  total agricultural output; disruptions caused by civil war, and
  marketing deficiencies require food imports
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $265 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $1.105 billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $1.3 billion; net
  official disbursements (1985-89), $750 million 
Currency: 
  1 new kwanza (NKz) = 100 lwei
Exchange rates: 
  kwanza (Kz) per US$1 - 90,000 (official rate 1June 1994), 180,000
  (black market rate 1 June 1994); 7,000 (official rate 16 December
  1993), 50,000 (black market rate 16 December 1993); 3,884 (July 1993);
  550 (April 1992); 90 (November 1991); 60 (October 1990)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Angola, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,189 km total; 2,879 km 1.067-meter gauge, 310 km 0.600-meter gauge;
  limited trackage in use because of landmines still in place from the
  civil war; majority of the Benguela Railroad also closed because of
  civil war
Highways: 
total: 
  73,828 km 
paved: 
  bituminous-surface 8,577 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel, improved earth 29,350 km; unimproved earth
  35,901 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,295 km navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 179 km 
Ports: 
  Luanda, Lobito, Namibe, Cabinda
Merchant marine: 
  12 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 63,776 GRT/99,863 DWT, cargo 11,
  oil tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  302 
usable: 
  175 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  32 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  18 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  59 
Telecommunications: 
  limited system of wire, microwave radio relay, and troposcatter
  routes; high frequency radio used extensively for military links;
  telephone service limited mostly to government and business use;
  40,300 telephones (4.1 telephones per 1,000 persons); broadcast
  stations - 17 AM, 13 FM, 6 TV; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  stations

@Angola, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force/Air Defense, People's Defense Organization and
  Territorial Troops, 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,262,669; fit for military service 1,139,319; reach
  military age (18) annually 96,900 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Anguilla

Header

Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Anguilla, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about 270 km east of Puerto
  Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  91 sq km 
land area: 
  91 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about half the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  61 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
     3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds
Terrain: 
  flat and low-lying island of coral and limestone
Natural resources: 
  negligible; salt, fish, lobster 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA% (mostly rock with sparse scrub oak, few trees, some commercial
  salt ponds)
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  frequent hurricanes and other tropical storms (July to October)
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Anguilla, People

Population: 
  7,052 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.67% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.25 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.08 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -9.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  17.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.99 years 
male: 
  71.21 years 
female: 
  76.8 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.07 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Anguillan(s) 
adjective: 
  Anguillan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black African 
Religions: 
  Anglican 40%, Methodist 33%, Seventh-Day Adventist 7%, Baptist 5%,
  Roman Catholic 3%, other 12% 
Languages: 
  English (official)
Literacy: 
  age 12 and over can read and write (1984)
total population: 
  95% 
male: 
  95% 
female: 
  95% 
Labor force: 
  2,780 (1984)
by occupation: 
  NA

@Anguilla, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Anguilla 
Digraph: 
  AV
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  The Valley 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Anguilla Day, 30 May 
Constitution: 
  Anguilla Constitutional Orders 1 April 1982; amended 1990
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  Alan W. SHAVE (since 14 August 1992) 
head of government: 
  Chief Minister Hubert HUGHES (since 16 March 1994) 
cabinet: 
   Executive Council; appointed by the governor from the elected members
  of the House of Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 16 March 1994 (next to be held March 1999);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (11 total, 7 elected)
  ANA 2, AUP 2, ADP 2, independent 1
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Anguilla National Alliance (ANA); Anguilla United Party (AUP), Hubert
  HUGHES; Anguilla Democratic Party (ADP), Victor BANKS
Member of: 
  CARICOM (observer), CDB, INTERPOL (subbureau) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  two horizontal bands of white (top, almost triple width) and light
  blue with three orange dolphins in an interlocking circular design
  centered in the white band; a new flag may have been in use since 30
  May 1990

@Anguilla, Economy

Overview: 
  Anguilla has few natural resources, and the economy depends heavily on
  lobster fishing, offshore banking, tourism, and remittances from
  emigrants. In recent years the economy has benefited from a boom in
  tourism and construction. Development plans center around the
  improvement of the infrastructure, particularly transport and tourist
  facilities, and also light industry.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $56.5 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.5% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $6,800 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  5% (1988 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $13.8 million 
expenditures: 
  $15.2 million, including capital expenditures of $2.4 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $556,000 (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  lobster and salt
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $33.5 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,000 kW
production: 
  6 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  862 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, boat building, salt
Agriculture: 
  pigeon peas, corn, sweet potatoes, sheep, goats, pigs, cattle,
  poultry, fishing (including lobster)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $38 million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  NA

@Anguilla, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  60 km 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Road Bay, Blowing Point
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 (1,000 m at Wallblake Airport)
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  modern internal telephone system; 890 telephones; broadcast stations -
  3 AM, 1 FM, no TV; radio relay microwave link to island of Saint
  Martin

@Anguilla, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Antarctica, Geography

Location: 
  continent mostly south of the Antarctic Circle
Map references: 
  Antarctic Region 
Area: 
total area: 
  14 million sq km (est.)
land area: 
  14 million sq km (est.)
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US
note: 
  second-smallest continent (after Australia)
Land boundaries: 
  none, but see entry on International disputes
Coastline: 
  17,968 km 
Maritime claims: 
  none, but see entry on International Disputes
International disputes: 
  Antarctic Treaty defers claims (see Antarctic Treaty Summary below);
  sections (some overlapping) claimed by Argentina, Australia, Chile,
  France (Adelie Land), New Zealand (Ross Dependency), Norway (Queen
  Maud Land), and UK; the US and most other nations do not recognize the
  territorial claims of other nations and have made no claims themselves
  (the US reserves the right to do so); no formal claims have been made
  in the sector between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west
Climate: 
  severe low temperatures vary with latitude, elevation, and distance
  from the ocean; East Antarctica is colder than West Antarctica because
  of its higher elevation; Antarctic Peninsula has the most moderate
  climate; higher temperatures occur in January along the coast and
  average slightly below freezing
Terrain: 
  about 98% thick continental ice sheet and 2% barren rock, with average
  elevations between 2,000 and 4,000 meters; mountain ranges up to 4,897
  meters high; ice-free coastal areas include parts of southern Victoria
  Land, Wilkes Land, the Antarctic Peninsula area, and parts of Ross
  Island on McMurdo Sound; glaciers form ice shelves along about half of
  the coastline, and floating ice shelves constitute 11% of the area of
  the continent
Natural resources: 
  none presently exploited; iron ore, chromium, copper, gold, nickel,
  platinum and other minerals, and coal and hydrocarbons have been found
  in small, uncommercial quantities 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (ice 98%, barren rock 2%)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  in October 1991 it was reported that the ozone shield, which protects
  the Earth's surface from harmful ultraviolet radiation, had dwindled
  to the lowest level recorded over Antarctica since 1975 when
  measurements were first taken
natural hazards: 
  katabatic (gravity-driven) winds blow coastward from the high
  interior; frequent blizzards form near the foot of the plateau;
  cyclonic storms form over the ocean and move clockwise along the
  coast; volcanism on Deception Island and isolated areas of West
  Antarctica; other seismic activity rare and weak
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  the coldest, windiest, highest, and driest continent; during summer
  more solar radiation reaches the surface at the South Pole than is
  received at the Equator in an equivalent period; mostly uninhabitable

@Antarctica, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are seasonally staffed
  research stations
Summer (January) population: 
  over 4,115 total; Argentina 207, Australia 268, Belgium 13, Brazil 80,
  Chile 256, China NA, Ecuador NA, Finland 11, France 78, Germany 32,
  Greenpeace 12, India 60, Italy 210, Japan 59, South Korea 14,
  Netherlands 10, NZ 264, Norway 23, Peru 39, Poland NA, South Africa
  79, Spain 43, Sweden 10, UK 116, Uruguay NA, US 1,666, former USSR 565
  (1989-90)
Winter (July) population: 
  over 1,046 total; Argentina 150, Australia 71, Brazil 12, Chile 73,
  China NA, France 33, Germany 19, Greenpeace 5, India 1, Japan 38,
  South Korea 14, NZ 11, Poland NA, South Africa 12, UK 69, Uruguay NA,
  US 225, former USSR 313 (1989-90)
Year-round stations: 
  42 total; Argentina 6, Australia 3, Brazil 1, Chile 3, China 2,
  Finland 1, France 1, Germany 1, India 1, Japan 2, South Korea 1, NZ 1,
  Poland 1, South Africa 3, UK 5, Uruguay 1, US 3, former USSR 6
  (1990-91)
Summer only stations: 
  over 38 total; Argentina 7, Australia 3, Chile 5, Germany 3, India 1,
  Italy 1, Japan 4, NZ 2, Norway 1, Peru 1, South Africa 1, Spain 1,
  Sweden 2, UK 1, US numerous, former USSR 5 (1989-90); note - the
  disintegration of the former USSR has placed the status and future of
  its Antarctic facilities in doubt; stations may be subject to closings
  at any time because of ongoing economic difficulties
Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Antarctica 
Digraph: 
  AY
Type: 
Antarctic Treaty Summary: 
  The Antarctic Treaty, signed on 1 December 1959 and entered into force
  on 23 June 1961, establishes the legal framework for the management of
  Antarctica. Administration is carried out through consultative member
  meetings - the 18th Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was in Japan
  in April 1993. Currently, there are 42 treaty member nations: 26
  consultative and 16 acceding. Consultative (voting) members include
  the seven nations that claim portions of Antarctica as national
  territory (some claims overlap) and 19 nonclaimant nations. The US and
  some other nations that have made no claims have reserved the right to
  do so. The US does not recognize the claims of others. The year in
  parentheses indicates when an acceding nation was voted to full
  consultative (voting) status, while no date indicates the country was
  an original 1959 treaty signatory. Claimant nations are - Argentina,
  Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway, and the UK. Nonclaimant
  consultative nations are - Belgium, Brazil (1983), China (1985),
  Ecuador (1990), Finland (1989), Germany (1981), India (1983), Italy
  (1987), Japan, South Korea (1989), Netherlands (1990), Peru (1989),
  Poland (1977), South Africa, Spain (1988), Sweden (1988), Uruguay
  (1985), the US, and Russia.
  Acceding (nonvoting) members, with year of accession in parentheses,
  are - Austria (1987), Bulgaria (1978), Canada (1988), Colombia (1988),
  Cuba (1984), Czech Republic (1993), Denmark (1965), Greece (1987),
  Guatemala (1991), Hungary (1984), North Korea (1987), Papua New Guinea
  (1981), Romania (1971), Slovakia (1993), Switzerland (1990), and
  Ukraine (1992).
Article 1: 
  area to be used for peaceful purposes only; military activity, such as
  weapons testing, is prohibited, but military personnel and equipment
  may be used for scientific research or any other peaceful purpose
Article 2: 
  freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation shall continue
Article 3: 
  free exchange of information and personnel in cooperation with the UN
  and other international agencies
Article 4: 
  does not recognize, dispute, or establish territorial claims and no
  new claims shall be asserted while the treaty is in force
Article 5: 
  prohibits nuclear explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes
Article 6: 
  includes under the treaty all land and ice shelves south of 60 degrees
  00 minutes south
Article 7: 
  treaty-state observers have free access, including aerial observation,
  to any area and may inspect all stations, installations, and
  equipment; advance notice of all activities and of the introduction of
  military personnel must be given
Article 8: 
  allows for jurisdiction over observers and scientists by their own
  states
Article 9: 
  frequent consultative meetings take place among member nations
Article 10: 
  treaty states will discourage activities by any country in Antarctica
  that are contrary to the treaty
Article 11: 
  disputes to be settled peacefully by the parties concerned or,
  ultimately, by the ICJ
Article 12, 13, 14: 
  deal with upholding, interpreting, and amending the treaty among
  involved nations
Other agreements: 
  more than 170 recommendations adopted at treaty consultative meetings
  and ratified by governments include - Agreed Measures for the
  Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964); Convention for the
  Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972); Convention on the Conservation
  of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980); a mineral resources
  agreement was signed in 1988 but was subsequently rejected; in 1991
  the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was
  signed and awaits ratification; this agreement provides for the
  protection of the Antarctic environment through five specific annexes
  on marine pollution, fauna, and flora, environmental impact
  assessments, waste management, and protected areas; it also prohibits
  all activities relating to mineral resources except scientific
  research; nine parties have ratified Protocol as of April 1994
Legal system: 
  US law, including certain criminal offenses by or against US
  nationals, such as murder, may apply to areas not under jurisdiction
  of other countries. Some US laws directly apply to Antarctica. For
  example, the Antarctic Conservation Act, 16 U.S.C. section 2401 et
  seq., provides civil and criminal penalties for the following
  activities, unless authorized by regulation of statute: The taking of
  native mammals or birds; the introduction of nonindigenous plants and
  animals; entry into specially protected or scientific areas; the
  discharge or disposal of pollutants; and the importation into the US
  of certain items from Antarctica. Violation of the Antarctic
  Conservation Act carries penalties of up to $10,000 in fines and 1
  year in prison. The Departments of Treasury, Commerce, Transportation,
  and Interior share enforcement responsibilities. Public Law 95-541,
  the US Antarctic Conservation Act of 1978, requires expeditions from
  the US to Antarctica to notify, in advance, the Office of Oceans and
  Polar Affairs, Room 5801, Department of State, Washington, DC 20520,
  which reports such plans to other nations as required by the Antarctic
  Treaty. For more information contact Permit Office, Office of Polar
  Programs, National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia 22230
  (703-306-1031).
Overview: 
  No economic activity at present except for fishing off the coast and
  small-scale tourism, both based abroad.

@Antarctica, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only at most coastal stations
Airports: 
  42 landing facilities at different locations operated by 15 national
  governments party to the Treaty; one additional air facility operated
  by commercial (nongovernmental) tourist organization; helicopter pads
  at 28 of these locations; runways at 10 locations are gravel, sea ice,
  glacier ice, or compacted snow surface suitable for wheeled fixed-wing
  aircraft; no paved runways; 16 locations have snow-surface skiways
  limited to use by ski-equipped planes--11 runways/skiways 1,000 to
  3,000 m, 3 runways/skiways less than 1,000 m, 5 runways/skiways
  greater than 3,000 m, and 7 of unspecified or variable length;
  airports generally subject to severe restrictions and limitations
  resulting from extreme seasonal and geographic conditions; airports do
  not meet ICAO standards; advance approval from the respective
  governmental or non-governmental operating organization required for
  landing

@Antarctica, Defense Forces

Note: 
  the Antarctic Treaty prohibits any measures of a military nature, such
  as the establishment of military bases and fortifications, the
  carrying out of military maneuvers, or the testing of any type of
  weapon; it permits the use of military personnel or equipment for
  scientific research or for any other peaceful purposes


@Antigua and Barbuda, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about 420 km east-southeast
  of Puerto Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  440 sq km 
land area: 
  440 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Redonda
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  153 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  mostly low-lying limestone and coral islands with some higher volcanic
  areas
Natural resources: 
  negligible; pleasant climate fosters tourism 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  18% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  16% 
other: 
  59% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  insufficient freshwater resources
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes and tropical storms (July to October)
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Whaling

@Antigua and Barbuda, People

Population: 
  64,762 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.59% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  17.31 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.44 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -5.93 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.11 years 
male: 
  71.07 years 
female: 
  75.26 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.67 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Antiguan(s), Barbudan(s) 
adjective: 
  Antiguan, Barbudan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black African, British, Portuguese, Lebanese, Syrian 
Religions: 
  Anglican (predominant), other Protestant sects, some Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  English (official), local dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having completed 5 or more years of schooling (1960)
total population: 
  89% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  88% 
Labor force: 
  30,000 
by occupation: 
  commerce and services 82%, agriculture 11%, industry 7% (1983)

@Antigua and Barbuda, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Antigua and Barbuda 
Digraph: 
  AC
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Saint John's 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 parishes and 2 dependencies*; Barbuda*, Redonda*, Saint George,
  Saint John, Saint Mary, Saint Paul, Saint Peter, Saint Philip
Independence: 
  1 November 1981 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 November (1981) 
Constitution: 
  1 November 1981
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General James B. CARLISLE (since NA 1993) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Lester Bryant BIRD (since 8 March 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the governor general on the advice
  of the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  17 member body appointed by the governor general
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 8 March 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (17 total) ALP 11, UPP 5,
  independent 1
Judicial branch: 
  Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Antigua Labor Party (ALP), Lester Bryant BIRD; United Progressive
  Party (UPP), Baldwin SPENCER
Other political or pressure groups: 
  United Progressive Party (UPP), headed by Baldwin SPENCER, a coalition
  of three opposition political parties - the United National Democratic
  Party (UNDP); the Antigua Caribbean Liberation Movement (ACLM); and
  the Progressive Labor Movement (PLM); Antigua Trades and Labor Union
  (ATLU), headed by Noel THOMAS
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM (observer), OAS, OECS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, WCL,
  WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Patrick Albert LEWIS 
chancery: 
  Suite 4M, 3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 362-5211 or 5166, 5122 
FAX: 
  (202) 362-5225 
consulate(s) general: 
  Miami 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  the US Ambassador to Barbados is accredited to Antigua and Barbuda,
  and, in his absence, the Embassy is headed by Charge d'Affaires Bryant
  J. SALTER 
embassy: 
  Queen Elizabeth Highway, Saint John's 
mailing address: 
  FPO AA 34054-0001 
telephone: 
  (809) 462-3505 or 3506 
FAX: 
  (809) 462-3516 
Flag: 
  red with an inverted isosceles triangle based on the top edge of the
  flag; the triangle contains three horizontal bands of black (top),
  light blue, and white with a yellow rising sun in the black band

@Antigua and Barbuda, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is primarily service oriented, with tourism the most
  important determinant of economic performance. During the period
  1986-91, real GDP expanded at an annual average rate of about 6%.
  Tourism makes a direct contribution to GDP of about 13% and also
  affects growth in other sectors - particularly in construction,
  communications, and public utilities. In 1992, reduced government
  capital spending and private sector investment, dampened by recession
  in the major world economies, slowed economic growth.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $368.5 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $5,800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  5% (1988 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $105 million 
expenditures: 
  $161 million, including capital expenditures of $56 million (1992)
Exports: 
  $54.7 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  petroleum products 48%, manufactures 23%, food and live animals 4%,
  machinery and transport equipment 17%
partners: 
  OECS 26%, Barbados 15%, Guyana 4%, Trinidad and Tobago 2%, US 0.3%
Imports: 
  $260.9 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  food and live animals, machinery and transport equipment,
  manufactures, chemicals, oil
partners: 
  US 27%, UK 16%, Canada 4%, OECS 3%, other 50%
External debt: 
  $250 million (1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3% (1989 est.); accounts for 8% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  52,100 kW
production: 
  95 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,482 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, construction, light manufacturing (clothing, alcohol,
  household appliances)
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4% of GDP; expanding output of cotton, fruits,
  vegetables, and livestock; other crops - bananas, coconuts, cucumbers,
  mangoes, sugarcane; not self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments (1985-88), $10 million; Western (non-US) countries, ODA
  and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $50 million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Antigua and Barbuda, Communications

Railroads: 
  64 km 0.760-meter narrow gauge and 13 km 0.610-meter gauge used almost
  exclusively for handling sugarcane
Highways: 
total: 
  240 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Saint John's
Merchant marine: 
  227 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 849,699 GRT/1,218,492 DWT, bulk
  4, cargo 156, chemical tanker 11, container 37, liquified gas 2, oil
  tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  good automatic telephone system; 6,700 telephones; tropospheric
  scatter links with Saba and Guadeloupe; broadcast stations - 4 AM, 2
  FM, 2 TV, 2 shortwave; 1 coaxial submarine cable; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Antigua and Barbuda, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defense Force, Royal Antigua and Barbuda
  Police Force (including the Coast Guard)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.4 million, 1% of GDP (FY90/91)


@Arctic Ocean, Geography

Location: 
  body of water mostly north of the Arctic Circle
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Asia, North America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  14.056 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 1.5 times the size of the US; smallest of the
  world's four oceans (after Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and Indian
  Ocean)
note: 
  includes Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea, East
  Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara Sea,
  Laptev Sea, Northwest Passage, and other tributary water bodies
Coastline: 
  45,389 km 
International disputes: 
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states); Svalbard is the focus of
  a maritime boundary dispute between Norway and Russia
Climate: 
  polar climate characterized by persistent cold and relatively narrow
  annual temperature ranges; winters characterized by continuous
  darkness, cold and stable weather conditions, and clear skies; summers
  characterized by continuous daylight, damp and foggy weather, and weak
  cyclones with rain or snow
Terrain: 
  central surface covered by a perennial drifting polar icepack that
  averages about 3 meters in thickness, although pressure ridges may be
  three times that size; clockwise drift pattern in the Beaufort Gyral
  Stream, but nearly straight line movement from the New Siberian
  Islands (Russia) to Denmark Strait (between Greenland and Iceland);
  the ice pack is surrounded by open seas during the summer, but more
  than doubles in size during the winter and extends to the encircling
  land masses; the ocean floor is about 50% continental shelf (highest
  percentage of any ocean) with the remainder a central basin
  interrupted by three submarine ridges (Alpha Cordillera, Nansen
  Cordillera, and Lomonsov Ridge); maximum depth is 4,665 meters in the
  Fram Basin
Natural resources: 
  sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules, oil
  and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals and whales) 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  endangered marine species include walruses and whales; fragile
  ecosystem slow to change and slow to recover from disruptions or
  damage
natural hazards: 
  ice islands occasionally break away from northern Ellesmere Island;
  icebergs calved from glaciers in western Greenland and extreme
  northeastern Canada; permafrost in islands; virtually icelocked from
  October to June
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  major chokepoint is the southern Chukchi Sea (northern access to the
  Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait); ships subject to superstructure
  icing from October to May; strategic location between North America
  and Russia; shortest marine link between the extremes of eastern and
  western Russia, floating research stations operated by the US and
  Russia; maximum snow cover in March or April about 20 to 50
  centimeters over the frozen ocean and lasts about 10 months

@Arctic Ocean, Government

Digraph: 
  XQ

@Arctic Ocean, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is limited to the exploitation of natural resources,
  including petroleum, natural gas, fish, and seals.

@Arctic Ocean, Communications

Ports: 
  Churchill (Canada), Murmansk (Russia), Prudhoe Bay (US)
Telecommunications: 
  no submarine cables
Note: 
  sparse network of air, ocean, river, and land routes; the Northwest
  Passage (North America) and Northern Sea Route (Eurasia) are important
  seasonal waterways


@Argentina, Geography

Location: 
  Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean between
  Chile and Uruguay
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,766,890 sq km 
land area: 
  2,736,690 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three-tenths the size of the US
Land boundaries: 
  total 9,665 km, Bolivia 832 km, Brazil 1,224 km, Chile 5,150 km,
  Paraguay 1,880 km, Uruguay 579 km 
Coastline: 
  4,989 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  200 nm; overflight and navigation permitted beyond 12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of the boundary with Uruguay is in dispute; short
  section of the boundary with Chile is indefinite; claims
  British-administered Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas); claims
  British-administered South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands;
  territorial claim in Antarctica
Climate: 
  mostly temperate; arid in southeast; subantarctic in southwest
Terrain: 
  rich plains of the Pampas in northern half, flat to rolling plateau of
  Patagonia in south, rugged Andes along western border
Natural resources: 
  fertile plains of the pampas, lead, zinc, tin, copper, iron ore,
  manganese, petroleum, uranium 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  9% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  52% 
forest and woodland: 
  22% 
other: 
  13% 
Irrigated land: 
  17,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  erosion results from inadequate flood controls and improper land use
  practices; irrigated soil degradation; desertification; air pollution
  in Buenos Aires and other major cites; water pollution in urban areas;
  rivers becoming polluted due to increased pesticide and fertilizer use
natural hazards: 
  Tucuman and Mendoza areas in the Andes subject to earthquakes;
  pamperos are violent windstorms that can strike the Pampas and
  northeast; heavy flooding
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Climate
  Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Whaling; signed, but not ratfied - Biodiversity, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  second-largest country in South America (after Brazil); strategic
  location relative to sea lanes between South Atlantic and South
  Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel, Drake Passage)

@Argentina, People

Population: 
  33,912,994 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.12% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.62 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.63 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  29.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.35 years 
male: 
  68.06 years 
female: 
  74.81 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.68 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Argentine(s) 
adjective: 
  Argentine 
Ethnic divisions: 
  white 85%, mestizo, Indian, or other nonwhite groups 15% 
Religions: 
  nominally Roman Catholic 90% (less than 20% practicing), Protestant
  2%, Jewish 2%, other 6% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), English, Italian, German, French 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  95% 
male: 
  96% 
female: 
  95% 
Labor force: 
  10.9 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 12%, industry 31%, services 57% (1985 est.)

@Argentina, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Argentine Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Argentina 
local long form: 
  Republica Argentina 
local short form: 
  Argentina 
Digraph: 
     AR
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Buenos Aires 
Administrative divisions: 
  23 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia), and 1 federal
  district* (distrito federal); Buenos Aires; Catamarca; Chaco; Chubut;
  Cordoba; Corrientes; Distrito Federal*; Entre Rios; Formosa; Jujuy; La
  Pampa; La Rioja; Mendoza; Misiones; Neuquen; Rio Negro; Salta; San
  Juan; San Luis; Santa Cruz; Santa Fe; Santiago del Estero; Tierra del
  Fuego, Antartida e Islas del Atlantico Sur; Tucuman
note: 
  the US does not recognize any claims to Antarctica or Argentina's
  claims to the Falkland Islands
Independence: 
  9 July 1816 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Revolution Day, 25 May (1810) 
Constitution: 
  1 May 1853
Legal system: 
  mixture of US and West European legal systems; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Carlos Saul MENEM (since 8 July 1989); Vice President
  (position vacant); election last held 14 May 1989 (next to be held
  summer 1995); results - Carlos Saul MENEM was elected
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Congress (Congreso Nacional)
Senate: 
  elections last held May 1989, but provincial elections in late 1991
  set the stage for indirect elections by provincial senators for
  one-third of 48 seats in the national senate in May 1992; seats (48
  total) - PJ 30, UCR 11, others 7
Chamber of Deputies: 
  elections last held NA October 1993 ( next to be held October 1995);
  elections are held every two years and half of the total membership is
  elected each time for four year terms; seats--(257 total) PJ 128, UCR
  81, MODIN 7, UCD 5, other 36
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Justicialist Party (PJ), Carlos Saul MENEM, Peronist umbrella
  political organization; Radical Civic Union (UCR),Raul ALFONSIN,
  moderately left-of-center party; Union of the Democratic Center (UCD),
  Jorge AGUADO, conservative party; Intransigent Party (PI), Dr. Oscar
  ALENDE, leftist party; Dignity and Independence Political Party
  (MODIN), Aldo RICO, right-wing party; Grand Front (Frente Grande),
  Carlos ALVAREZ, center-left coalition; several provincial parties
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Peronist-dominated labor movement; General Confederation of Labor
  (CGT; Peronist-leaning umbrella labor organization); Argentine
  Industrial Union (manufacturers' association); Argentine Rural Society
  (large landowners' association); business organizations; students; the
  Roman Catholic Church; the Armed Forces
Member of: 
  AG (observer), Australia Group, BCIE, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-6, G-11,
  G-15, G-19, G-24, AfDB, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, MERCOSUR, MINURSO, MTCR, OAS,
  PCA, RG, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMOZ,
  UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Raul Enrique GRANILLO OCAMPO 
chancery: 
  1600 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-6400 through 6403 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York,
  San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador James CHEEK (since 28 May 1993) 
embassy: 
  4300 Colombia, 1425 Buenos Aires 
mailing address: 
  APO AA 34034 
telephone: 
  [54] (1) 774-7611, 8811, 9911 
FAX: 
  [54] (1) 775-4205 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of light blue (top), white, and light
  blue; centered in the white band is a radiant yellow sun with a human
  face known as the Sun of May

@Argentina, Economy

Overview: 
  Argentina is rich in natural resources and has a highly literate
  population, an export-oriented agricultural sector, and a diversified
  industrial base. Nevertheless, following decades of mismanagement and
  statist policies, the economy in the late 1980s was plagued with huge
  external debts and recurring bouts of hyperinflation. Elected in 1989,
  in the depths of recession, President MENEM has implemented a
  comprehensive economic restructuring program that shows signs of
  putting Argentina on a path of stable, sustainable growth. Argentina's
  currency has traded at par with the US dollar since April 1991, and
  inflation has fallen to its lowest level in 20 years. Argentines have
  responded to the relative price stability by repatriating flight
  capital and investing in domestic industry. Growth slowed somewhat in
  1993 but Argentina still registered an impressive 6% advance, fueled
  largely by inflows of foreign capital and strong domestic consumption
  spending. The government's major short term objective is encouraging
  exports, e.g., by reducing domestic costs of production. Much remains
  to be done in the 1990s in dismantling the old statist barriers to
  growth and in solidifying the recent economic gains.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $185 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7.4% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  10% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $33.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $35.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.5 billion (1992)
Exports: 
  $12.7 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  meat, wheat, corn, oilseed, hides, wool
partners: 
  US 12%, Brazil, Italy, Japan, Netherlands
Imports: 
  $16 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals, fuels and lubricants,
  agricultural products
partners: 
  US 22%, Brazil, Germany, Bolivia, Japan, Italy, Netherlands
External debt: 
  $73 billion (April 1994)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 10% (1992 est.); accounts for 31% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  17,911,000 kW
production: 
  51.305 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,559 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, motor vehicles, consumer durables, textiles,
  chemicals and petrochemicals, printing, metallurgy, steel
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 8% of GDP (including fishing); produces abundant food for
  both domestic consumption and exports; among world's top five
  exporters of grain and beef; principal crops - wheat, corn, sorghum,
  soybeans, sugar beets
Illicit drugs: 
  increasing use as a transshipment country for cocaine headed for the
  US and Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $4.4
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $718 million 
Currency: 
  1 nuevo peso argentino = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  pesos per US$1 - 0.99850 (January 1994), 0.99895 (1993), 0.99064
  (1992), 0.95355 (1991), 0.48759 (1990), 0.04233 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Argentina, Communications

Railroads: 
  34,172 km total (includes 209 km electrified); includes a mixture of
  1.435-meter standard gauge, 1.676-meter broad gauge, 1.000-meter
  narrow gauge, and 0.750-meter narrow gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  208,350 km 
paved: 
  57,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 39,500 km; improved/unimproved earth 111,850 km 
Inland waterways: 
  11,000 km navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 4,090 km; petroleum products 2,900 km; natural gas 9,918 km 
Ports: 
  Bahia Blanca, Buenos Aires, Comodoro Rivadavia, La Plata, Rosario,
  Santa Fe
Merchant marine: 
  57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 656,289 GRT/1,008,792 DWT, bulk
  3, cargo 29, container 4, oil tanker 14, railcar carrier 1,
  refrigerated cargo 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  1,649 
usable: 
  1,394 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  139 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  31 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  332 
Telecommunications: 
  extensive modern system but many families do not have telephones;
  2,650,000 telephones (12,000 public telephones); telephone density 78
  per 1000 persons; microwave widely used; broadcast stations - 171 AM,
  no FM, 231 TV, 13 shortwave; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations;
  domestic satellite network has 40 earth stations

@Argentina, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Argentine Army, Navy of the Argentine Republic, Argentine Air Force,
  National Gendarmerie, Argentine Naval Prefecture (Coast Guard only),
  National Aeronautical Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 8,417,880; fit for military service 6,825,795; reach
  military age (20) annually 292,725 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Armenia, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Asia, between Turkey and Azerbaijan
Map references: 
  Africa, Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - European States,
  Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  29,800 sq km 
land area: 
  28,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,254 km, Azerbaijan (east) 566 km, Azerbaijan (south) 221 km,
  Georgia 164 km, Iran 35 km, Turkey 268 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  violent and longstanding dispute with Azerbaijan over ethnically
  Armenian exclave of Nagorno-Karabakh; traditional demands on former
  Armenian lands in Turkey have greatly subsided
Climate: 
  highland continental, hot summers, cold winters
Terrain: 
  high Armenian Plateau with mountains; little forest land; fast flowing
  rivers; good soil in Aras River valley
Natural resources: 
  small deposits of gold, copper, molybdenum, zinc, alumina 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  17% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  60% 
Irrigated land: 
  3,050 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil pollution from toxic chemicals such as DDT; energy blockade, the
  result of conflict with Azerbaijan, has led to deforestation as
  citizens scavenge for firewood; pollution of Hrazdan (Razdan) and Aras
  Rivers; the draining of Lake Sevan, a result of its use as a source
  for hydropower, threatens drinking water supplies; air pollution in
  Yerevan
natural hazards: 
  occasionally severe earthquakes (25,000 people killed in major quake
  in 1988); subject to drought
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  landlocked

@Armenia, People

Population: 
  3,521,517 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.08% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.21 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.72 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.72 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.07 years 
male: 
  68.65 years 
female: 
  75.65 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.19 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Armenian(s) 
adjective: 
  Armenian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Armenian 93%, Azeri 3%, Russian 2%, other 2% 
Religions: 
  Armenian Orthodox 94% 
Languages: 
  Armenian 96%, Russian 2%, other 2% 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  1.578 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 34%, agriculture and forestry 31%, other 35%
  (1992)

@Armenia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Armenia 
conventional short form: 
  Armenia 
local long form: 
  Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun 
local short form: 
  Hayastan 
former: 
  Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic; Armenian Republic 
Digraph: 
  AM
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Yerevan 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (all rayons are under direct republic jurisdiction)
Independence: 
  28 May 1918 (First Armenian Republic);  23 September 1991 (from Soviet
  Union)
National holiday: 
  Referendum Day, 21 September 
Constitution: 
  adopted NA April 1978; post-Soviet constitution not yet adopted
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Levon Akopovich TER-PETROSYAN (since 16 October 1991), Vice
  President Gagik ARUTYUNYAN (since 16 October 1991); election last held
  16 October 1991 (next to be held NA); results - Levon Akopovich
  TER-PETROSYAN 86%; radical nationalists about 7%; note - Levon
  Akopovich TER-PETROSYAN was elected Chairman of the Armenian Supreme
  Soviet 4 August 1990 before becoming president
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Hrant BAGRATYAN (since 16 February 1993); First Deputy
  Prime Minister Vigen CHITECHYAN (since 16 February 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme Soviet: 
  elections last held 20 May 1990 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (260 total) non-aligned 125, ANM
  52, DPA 23, Democratic Liberal Party 17, ARF 17, NDU 9, Christian
  Democratic Party 1, Constitutional Rights Union 1, UNSD 1, Republican
  Party 1, Nagorno-Karabakh representatives 13
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Armenian National Movement (ANM), Ter-Husik LAZARYAN, chairman;
  National Democratic Union (NDU), David VARTANYAN, chairman; Armenian
  Revolutionary Federation (ARF, Dashnaktsutyun), Arutyun ALISTAKESYAN,
  chairman; Democratic Party of Armenia (DPA; Communist Party), Aram
  SARKISYAN, chairman; Christian Democratic Party, Azat ARSHAKYAN,
  chairman; Greens Party, Hakob SANASARIAN, chairman; Democratic Liberal
  Party, Rouben MIRZAKHANYAN, chairman; Republican Party, Ashot
  NAVARSARDYAN, chairman; Union for Self-Determination (UNSD), Paruir
  AIRIKYAN, chairman
Member of: 
  BSEC, CCC, CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, ILO,
  IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, NACC, NAM (observer), UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Rouben Robert SHUGARIAN 
chancery: 
  Suite 210, 1660 L Street NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 628-5766 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Harry J. GILMORE 
embassy: 
  18 Gen Bagramian, Yerevan 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  7-8852-151-144 or 8852-524-661 
FAX: 
  7-8852-151-138 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue, and gold

@Armenia, Economy

Overview: 
  Under the old central planning system, Armenia had built up a
  developed industrial sector, supplying machine building equipment,
  textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in exchange
  for raw materials and energy resources. Armenia is a large food
  importer and its mineral deposits (gold, bauxite) are small. The
  economic decline in the past three years (1991-93) has been
  particularly severe due to the ongoing conflict over the Armenian
  enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan and Turkey have
  blockaded pipeline and railroad traffic to Armenia for its support of
  the Karabakh Armenians. This has left Armenia with only sporadic
  deliveries of natural gas through unstable Georgia, while other fuel
  and raw materials are in critical short supply. Inflation, roughly 14%
  per month in the first nine months of 1993, surged even higher in the
  fourth quarter. In late 1993, most industrial enterprises were either
  shut down or operating at drastically reduced levels. Only small
  quantities of food were available (mostly humanitarian aid), heat was
  nonexistent, and electricity strictly rationed. An economic recovery
  cannot be expected until the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is settled and
  until transportation through Georgia improves.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $7.1 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Armenian statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -9.9% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,040 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  14% per month average (first 9 months, 1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  6.5% of officially registered unemployed but large numbers of
  underemployed (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $31 million to countries outside the FSU (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, light industrial products,
  processed food items, alcoholic products (1991)
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $87 million from countries outside the FSU (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  grain, other foods, fuel, other energy (1991)
partners: 
  Russia, US, EC
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -11% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,875,000 kW
production: 
  9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,585 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  traditionally diverse, including (as a percent of output of former
  USSR) metalcutting machine tools (5.5%), forging-pressing machines
  (1.9%), electric motors (9%), tires (1.5%), knitted wear (4.4%),
  hosiery (3.0%), shoes (2.2%), silk fabric (0.8%), washing machines
  (2.0%), chemicals, trucks, watches, instruments, and microelectronics
  (1990); currently, much of industry is shut down
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 45% of GDP; only 17% of land area is arable;
  employs 20%-30% of labor force as residents increasingly turn to
  subsistence agriculture; fruits (especially grapes) and vegetable
  farming, minor livestock sector; vineyards near Yerevan are famous for
  brandy and other liqueurs
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis mostly for domestic consumption; used
  as a transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  considerable humanitarian aid, mostly food and energy products, from
  US and EC; Russia has granted 60 billion rubles in technical credits
Currency: 
  1 dram = 100 luma; introduced separate currency in November 1993
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Armenia, Communications

Railroads: 
  840 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  11,300 km 
paved: 
  10,500 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 800 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  NA km
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 900 km (1991)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  12 
usable: 
  10 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  2 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  progress on installation of fiber optic cable and construction of
  facilities for mobile cellular phone service remains in the
  negotiation phase for joint venture agreement; Armenia has about
  650,000 telephones; average telephone density is 17.7 per 100 persons;
  international connections to other former republics of the USSR are by
  landline or microwave and to other countries by satellite and by
  leased connection through the Moscow international gateway switch;
  broadcast stations - 100% of population receives Armenian and Russian
  TV programs; satellite earth station - INTELSAT

@Armenia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, National Guard, Security Forces (internal and border
  troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 862,921; fit for military service 690,113; reach
  military age (18) annually 28,458 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  250 million rubles, NA% of GDP (1992 est.); note - conversion of the
  military budget into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Aruba

Header
Affiliation: 
  (part of the Dutch realm) 

@Aruba, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the southern Caribbean Sea, 28 km north of Venezuela and
  125 km east of Colombia
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  193 sq km 
land area: 
  193 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  68.5 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  12 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  flat with a few hills; scant vegetation
Natural resources: 
  negligible; white sandy beaches 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  lies outside the Caribbean hurricane belt
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Aruba, People

Population: 
  65,545 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.65% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.95 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.12 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.43 years 
male: 
  72.77 years 
female: 
  80.27 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.82 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Aruban(s) 
adjective: 
  Aruban 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mixed European/Caribbean Indian 80% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 82%, Protestant 8%, Hindu, Muslim, Confucian, Jewish 
Languages: 
  Dutch (official), Papiamento (a Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, English
  dialect), English (widely spoken), Spanish 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  most employment is in the tourist industry (1986)

@Aruba, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Aruba 
Digraph: 
  AA
Type: 
  part of the Dutch realm; full autonomy in internal affairs obtained in
  1986 upon separation from the Netherlands Antilles
Capital: 
  Oranjestad 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (self-governing part of the Netherlands)
Independence: 
  none (part of the Dutch realm; in 1990, Aruba requested and received
  from the Netherlands cancellation of the agreement to automatically
  give independence to the island in 1996)
National holiday: 
  Flag Day, 18 March 
Constitution: 
  1 January 1986
Legal system: 
  based on Dutch civil law system, with some English common law
  influence
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard (since 30 April 1980), represented by
  Governor General Olindo KOOLMAN (since 1 January 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Nelson ODUBER (since 6 February 1989) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed with the advice and approval of the
  legislature
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislature (Staten): 
  elections last held 8 January 1993 (next to be held by NA January
  1997); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (21 total) MEP
  9, AVP 8, ADN 1, PPA 1, OLA 1, other 1
Judicial branch: 
  Joint High Court of Justice 
     Political parties and leaders: 
          Electoral Movement Party (MEP), Nelson ODUBER; Aruban People's Party
          (AVP), Henny EMAN; National Democratic Action (ADN), Pedro Charro
          KELLY; New Patriotic Party (PPN), Eddy WERLEMEN; Aruban Patriotic
          Party (PPA), Benny NISBET; Aruban Democratic Party (PDA), Leo
          BERLINSKI; Democratic Action '86 (AD '86), Arturo ODUBER; Organization
          for Aruban Liberty (OLA), Glenbert CROES
     note: 
          governing coalition includes the MEP, PPA, and ADN
     Member of: 
          ECLAC (associate), INTERPOL, IOC, UNESCO (associate), WCL, WTO
          (associate) 
     Diplomatic representation in US: 
          none (self-governing part of the Netherlands)
     US diplomatic representation: 
          none (self-governing part of the Netherlands)
     Flag: 
          blue with two narrow horizontal yellow stripes across the lower
          portion and a red, four-pointed star outlined in white in the upper
          hoist-side corner

@Aruba, Economy

Overview: 
  Tourism is the mainstay of the economy, although offshore banking and
  oil refining and storage are also important. Hotel capacity expanded
  rapidly between 1985 and 1989 and nearly doubled in 1990 alone.
  Unemployment has steadily declined from about 20% in 1986 to about 3%
  in 1991 and to less than 1% in 1992. The reopening of the local oil
  refinery, once a major source of employment and foreign exchange
  earnings, promises to give the economy an additional boost.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $1.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $17,400 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6.5% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  0.6% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $145 million 
expenditures: 
  $185 million, including capital expenditures of $42 million (1988)
Exports: 
  $1.3 billion (including oil re-exports) (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
     mostly petroleum products
partners: 
  US 64%, EC
Imports: 
  $1.6 billion including oil for processing and re-export (f.o.b., 1993
  est.)
commodities: 
  food, consumer goods, manufactures, petroleum products
partners: 
  US 8%, EC
External debt: 
  $81 million (1987)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  90,000 kW
production: 
  375 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,000 kWh (1990 est.)
Industries: 
  tourism, transshipment facilities, oil refining
Agriculture: 
  poor quality soils and low rainfall limit agricultural activity to the
  cultivation of aloes, some livestock, and fishing
Illicit drugs: 
  drug money laundering center and transit point for narcotics bound for
  the US and Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1980-89), $220 million 
Currency: 
  1 Aruban florin (Af.) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Aruban florins (Af.) per US$1 - 1.7900 (fixed rate since 1986)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Aruba, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Oranjestad, Sint Nicolaas
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
note: 
  government-owned airport east of Oranjestad accepts transatlantic
  flights
Telecommunications: 
  more than adequate; telephone density - 1,100 telephones per 1,000
  persons; extensive interisland microwave radio relay links; 72,168
  telephones; broadcast stations - 4 AM, 4 FM, 1 TV; 1 submarine cable
  to Saint Maarten

@Aruba, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the Netherlands


@Ashmore and Cartier Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Australia) 

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, in the Indian Ocean, 320 km off the northwest coast
  of Australia, between Australia and Indonesia
Map references: 
  Oceania, Southeast Asia 
Area: 
total area: 
  5 sq km 
land area: 
  5 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 8.5 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Ashmore Reef (West, Middle, and East Islets) and Cartier
  Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  74.1 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploration
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  low with sand and coral
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (all grass and sand)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  surrounded by shoals and reefs
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve established in August 1983

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are only seasonal caretakers

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Ashmore and Cartier Islands 
Digraph: 
  AT
Type: 
  territory of Australia administered by the Australian Ministry for the
  Environment, Sport, and Territories
Capital: 
  none; administered from Canberra, Australia
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Independence: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Legal system: 
  relevant laws of the Northern Territory of Australia
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of Australia)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of Australia)

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only

@Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Australia; periodic visits by the
  Royal Australian Navy and Royal Australian Air Force


@Atlantic Ocean, Geography

Location: 
  body of water between the Western Hemisphere and Europe/Africa
Map references: 
  Africa, Antarctic Region, Arctic Region, Central America and the
  Caribbean, Europe, North America, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  82.217 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than nine times the size of the US; second-largest of
  the world's four oceans (after the Pacific Ocean, but larger than
  Indian Ocean or Arctic Ocean)
note: 
  includes Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Caribbean Sea, Davis Strait, Denmark
  Strait, Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico, Mediterranean Sea, North Sea,
  Norwegian Sea, Scotia Sea, Weddell Sea, and other tributary water
  bodies
Coastline: 
  111,866 km 
International disputes: 
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)
Climate: 
  tropical cyclones (hurricanes) develop off the coast of Africa near
  Cape Verde and move westward into the Caribbean Sea; hurricanes can
  occur from May to December, but are most frequent from August to
  November
Terrain: 
  surface usually covered with sea ice in Labrador Sea, Denmark Strait,
  and Baltic Sea from October to June; clockwise warm water gyre (broad,
  circular system of currents) in the north Atlantic, counterclockwise
  warm water gyre in the south Atlantic; the ocean floor is dominated by
  the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a rugged north-south centerline for the entire
  Atlantic basin; maximum depth is 8,605 meters in the Puerto Rico
  Trench
Natural resources: 
  oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals (seals and whales), sand and
  gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules, precious
  stones 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  endangered marine species include the manatee, seals, sea lions,
  turtles, and whales; municipal sludge pollution off eastern US,
  southern Brazil, and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in Caribbean
  Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North Sea;
  industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in Baltic Sea, North
  Sea, and Mediterranean Sea
natural hazards: 
  icebergs common in Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, and the northwestern
  Atlantic Ocean from February to August and have been spotted as far
  south as Bermuda and the Madeira Islands; icebergs from Antarctica
  occur in the extreme southern Atlantic Ocean
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  ships subject to superstructure icing in extreme north Atlantic from
  October to May and extreme south Atlantic from May to October;
  persistent fog can be a hazard to shipping from May to September;
  major choke points include the Dardanelles, Strait of Gibraltar,
  access to the Panama and Suez Canals; strategic straits include the
  Strait of Dover, Straits of Florida, Mona Passage, The Sound
  (Oresund), and Windward Passage; north Atlantic shipping lanes subject
  to icebergs from February to August; the Equator divides the Atlantic
  Ocean into the North Atlantic Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean

@Atlantic Ocean, Government

Digraph: 
  ZH

@Atlantic Ocean, Economy

Overview: 
  The Atlantic Ocean provides some of the world's most heavily
  trafficked sea routes, between and within the Eastern and Western
  Hemispheres. Other economic activity includes the exploitation of
  natural resources, e.g., fishing, the dredging of aragonite sands (The
  Bahamas), and production of crude oil and natural gas (Caribbean Sea,
  Gulf of Mexico, and North Sea).

@Atlantic Ocean, Communications

Ports: 
  Alexandria (Egypt), Algiers (Algeria), Antwerp (Belgium), Barcelona
  (Spain), Buenos Aires (Argentina), Casablanca (Morocco), Colon
  (Panama), Copenhagen (Denmark), Dakar (Senegal), Gdansk (Poland),
  Hamburg (Germany), Helsinki (Finland), Las Palmas (Canary Islands,
  Spain), Le Havre (France), Lisbon (Portugal), London (UK), Marseille
  (France), Montevideo (Uruguay), Montreal (Canada), Naples (Italy), New
  Orleans (US), New York (US), Oran (Algeria), Oslo (Norway), Piraeus
  (Greece), Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Rotterdam (Netherlands), Saint
  Petersburg (formerly Leningrad; Russia), Stockholm (Sweden)
Telecommunications: 
  numerous submarine cables with most between continental Europe and the
  UK, North America and the UK, and in the Mediterranean; numerous
  direct links across Atlantic via INTELSAT satellite network
Note: 
  Kiel Canal and Saint Lawrence Seaway are two important waterways


@Australia, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Oceania, between Indonesia and New Zealand
Map references: 
  Southeast Asia, Oceania, Antarctic Region, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  7,686,850 sq km 
land area: 
  7,617,930 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than the US
note: 
  includes Macquarie Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  25,760 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  territorial claim in Antarctica (Australian Antarctic Territory)
Climate: 
  generally arid to semiarid; temperate in south and east; tropical in
  north
Terrain: 
  mostly low plateau with deserts; fertile plain in southeast
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, coal, iron ore, copper, tin, silver, uranium, nickel,
  tungsten, mineral sands, lead, zinc, diamonds, natural gas, petroleum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  58% 
forest and woodland: 
  14% 
other: 
  22% 
Irrigated land: 
  18,800 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion from overgrazing, industrial development, urbanization,
  and poor farming practices; soil salinity rising due to the use of
  poor quality water; desertification; clearing for agricultural
  purposes threatens the natural habitat of many unique animal and plant
  species; the Great Barrier Reef off the northeast coast, the largest
  coral reef in the world, is threatened by increased shipping and its
  popularity as a tourist site; limited freshwater availability
natural hazards: 
  cyclones along the coast; subject to severe droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not
  ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  world's smallest continent but sixth-largest country; population
  concentrated along the eastern and southeastern coasts; regular,
  tropical, invigorating, sea breeze known as "the Doctor" occurs along
  the west coast in the summer

@Australia, People

Population: 
  18,077,419 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.38% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.29 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  6.91 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.57 years 
male: 
  74.45 years 
female: 
  80.84 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Australian(s) 
adjective: 
  Australian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Caucasian 95%, Asian 4%, aboriginal and other 1% 
Religions: 
  Anglican 26.1%, Roman Catholic 26%, other Christian 24.3% 
Languages: 
  English, native languages 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  8.63 million (September 1991)
by occupation: 
  finance and services 33.8%, public and community services 22.3%,
  wholesale and retail trade 20.1%, manufacturing and industry 16.2%,
  agriculture 6.1% (1987)

@Australia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Commonwealth of Australia 
conventional short form: 
  Australia 
Digraph: 
  AS
Type: 
  federal parliamentary state 
Capital: 
  Canberra 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 states and 2 territories*; Australian Capital Territory*, New South
  Wales, Northern Territory*, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania,
  Victoria, Western Australia
Dependent areas: 
  Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling)
  Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Norfolk
  Island 
Independence: 
  1 January 1901 (federation of UK colonies)
National holiday: 
  Australia Day, 26 January (1788) 
Constitution: 
  9 July 1900, effective 1 January 1901
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General William George HAYDEN (since 16 February 1989) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Paul John KEATING (since 20 December 1991); Deputy
  Prime Minister Brian HOWE (since 4 June 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; prime minister selects his cabinet from members of the House
  and Senate
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Federal Parliament
Senate: 
  elections last held 13 March 1993 (next to be held by NA 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (76 total)
  Liberal-National 36, Labor 30, Australian Democrats 7, Greens 2,
  independents 1
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 13 March 1993 (next to be held by NA 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (147 total) Labor 80,
  Liberal-National 65, independent 2
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
government: 
  Australian Labor Party, Paul John KEATING
opposition: 
  Liberal Party, John HEWSON; National Party, Timothy FISCHER;
  Australian Democratic Party, Cheryl KERNOT; Green Party, leader NA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Australian Democratic Labor Party (anti-Communist Labor Party splinter
  group); Peace and Nuclear Disarmament Action (Nuclear Disarmament
  Party splinter group)
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), ANZUS, APEC, AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC,
  COCOM, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, GATT, G-8, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OECD, PCA,
  SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNOSOM,
  UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Donald RUSSELL 
chancery: 
  1601 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 797-3000 
FAX: 
  (202) 797-3168 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Pago Pago (American
  Samoa), and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward PERKINS 
embassy: 
  Moonah Place, Yarralumla, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 2600 
mailing address: 
  APO AP 96549 
telephone: 
  [61] (6) 270-5000 
FAX: 
  [61] (6) 270-5970 
consulate(s) general: 
  Melbourne, Perth, and Sydney 
consulate(s): 
  Brisbane 
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and a
  large seven-pointed star in the lower hoist-side quadrant; the
  remaining half is a representation of the Southern Cross constellation
  in white with one small five-pointed star and four, larger,
  seven-pointed stars

@Australia, Economy

Overview: 
  Australia has a prosperous Western-style capitalist economy, with a
  per capita GDP comparable to levels in industrialized West European
  countries. Rich in natural resources, Australia is a major exporter of
  agricultural products, minerals, metals, and fossil fuels. Primary
  products account for more than 60% of the value of total exports, so
  that, as in 1983-84, a downturn in world commodity prices can have a
  big impact on the economy. The government is pushing for increased
  exports of manufactured goods, but competition in international
  markets continues to be severe. Australia has suffered from the low
  growth and high unemployment characterizing the OECD countries in the
  early 1990s. In 1992-93 the economy recovered slowly from the
  prolonged recession of 1990-91, a major restraining factor being weak
  world demand for Australia's exports. Unemployment has hovered around
  10% and probably will remain at that level in 1994 as productivity
  gains rather than more jobs account for growth.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $339.7 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  4% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $19,100 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.1% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  10% (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $71.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $83.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY93)
Exports: 
  $44.1 billion (1992)
commodities: 
  coal, gold, meat, wool, alumina, wheat, machinery and transport
  equipment
partners: 
  Japan 25%, US 11%, South Korea 6%, NZ 5.7%, UK, Taiwan, Singapore,
  Hong Kong (1992)
Imports: 
  $43.6 billion (1992)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, computers and office machines,
  crude oil and petroleum products
partners: 
  US 23%, Japan 18%, UK 6%, Germany 5.7%, NZ 4% (1992)
External debt: 
  $141.1 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.9% (FY93); accounts for 32% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  40,000,000 kW
production: 
  150 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,475 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  mining, industrial and transportation equipment, food processing,
  chemicals, steel
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 5% of GDP and over 30% of export revenues; world's
  largest exporter of beef and wool, second-largest for mutton, and
  among top wheat exporters; major crops - wheat, barley, sugarcane,
  fruit; livestock - cattle, sheep, poultry
Illicit drugs: 
  Tasmania is one of the world's major suppliers of licit opiate
  products; government maintains strict controls over areas of opium
  poppy cultivation and output of poppy straw concentrate
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $10.4 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364 (January 1994), 1.4704
  (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2835 (1991), 1.2799 (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Australia, Communications

Railroads: 
  40,478 km total; 7,970 km 1.600-meter gauge, 16,201 km 1.435-meter
  standard gauge, 16,307 km 1.067-meter gauge; 183 km dual gauge; 1,130
  km electrified; government owned (except for a few hundred kilometers
  of privately owned track) (1985)
Highways: 
total: 
  837,872 km 
paved: 
  243,750 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 228,396 km; unimproved earth
  365,726 km 
Inland waterways: 
  8,368 km; mainly by small, shallow-draft craft
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,500 km; petroleum products 500 km; natural gas 5,600 km 
Ports: 
  Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns, Darwin, Devonport, Fremantle, Geelong,
  Hobart, Launceston, Mackay, Melbourne, Sydney, Townsville
Merchant marine: 
  83 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,517,538 GRT/3,711,549 DWT,
  bulk 30, cargo 8, chemical tanker 3, combination bulk 2, container 7,
  liquefied gas 5, oil tanker 18, roll-on/roll-off cargo 7, short-sea
  passenger 2, vehicle carrier 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  481 
usable: 
  440 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  241 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  20 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  268 
Telecommunications: 
  good international and domestic service; 8.7 million telephones;
  broadcast stations - 258 AM, 67 FM, 134 TV; submarine cables to New
  Zealand, Papua New Guinea, and Indonesia; domestic satellite service;
  satellite stations - 4 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 6 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT
  earth stations

@Australia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Australian Army, Royal Australian Navy, Royal Australian Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,885,574; fit for military service 4,239,459; reach
  military age (17) annually 133,337 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $7.1 billion, 2.4% of GDP (FY92/93)


@Austria, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between Germany and Hungary
Map references: 
  Africa, Arctic Region, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  83,850 sq km 
land area: 
  82,730 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Maine
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,496 km, Czech Republic 362 km, Germany 784 km, Hungary 366 km,
  Italy 430 km, Liechtenstein 37 km, Slovakia 91 km, Slovenia 262 km,
  Switzerland 164 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; continental, cloudy; cold winters with frequent rain in
  lowlands and snow in mountains; cool summers with occasional showers
Terrain: 
  in the west and south mostly mountains (Alps); along the eastern and
  northern margins mostly flat or gently sloping
Natural resources: 
  iron ore, petroleum, timber, magnesite, aluminum, lead, coal, lignite,
  copper, hydropower 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  17% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  24% 
forest and woodland: 
  39% 
other: 
  19% 
Irrigated land: 
  40 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  some forest degradation caused by air and soil pollution; soil
  pollution results from the use of agricultural chemicals; air
  pollution results from emissions by coal- and oil-fired power stations
  and industrial plants
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber,
  Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile Organic
  Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Law of the
  Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; strategic location at the crossroads of central Europe
  with many easily traversable Alpine passes and valleys; major river is
  the Danube; population is concentrated on eastern lowlands because of
  steep slopes, poor soils, and low temperatures elsewhere

@Austria, People

Population: 
  7,954,974 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.45% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.38 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.34 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.46 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.65 years 
male: 
  73.44 years 
female: 
  80.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.48 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Austrian(s) 
adjective: 
  Austrian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  German 99.4%, Croatian 0.3%, Slovene 0.2%, other 0.1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant 6%, other 9% 
Languages: 
  German 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1974 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  3.47 million (1989)
by occupation: 
  services 56.4%, industry and crafts 35.4%, agriculture and forestry
  8.1%
note: 
  an estimated 200,000 Austrians are employed in other European
  countries; foreign laborers in Austria number 177,840, about 6% of
  labor force (1988)

@Austria, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Austria 
conventional short form: 
  Austria 
local long form: 
  Republik Oesterreich 
local short form: 
  Oesterreich 
Digraph: 
  AU
Type: 
  federal republic 
Capital: 
  Vienna 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 states (bundeslander, singular - bundesland); Burgenland, Karnten,
  Niederoesterreich, Oberoesterreich, Salzburg, Steiermark, Tirol,
  Vorarlberg, Wien
Independence: 
  12 November 1918 (from Austro-Hungarian Empire)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 26 October (1955) 
Constitution: 
  1920; revised 1929 (reinstated 1 May 1945)
Legal system: 
  civil law system with Roman law origin; judicial review of legislative
  acts by a Constitutional Court; separate administrative and
  civil/penal supreme courts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  19 years of age, universal; compulsory for presidential elections
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Thomas KLESTIL (since 8 July 1992); election last held 24
  May 1992 (next to be held 1996); results of second ballot - Thomas
  KLESTIL 57%, Rudolf STREICHER 43%
head of government: 
  Chancellor Franz VRANITZKY (since 16 June 1986); Vice Chancellor
  Erhard BUSEK (since 2 July 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; chosen by the president on the advice of the
  chancellor
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung)
Federal Council (Bundesrat): 
  consists of 63 members representing each of the provinces on the basis
  of population, but with each province having at least 3
  representatives
National Council (Nationalrat): 
  elections last held 7 October 1990 (next to be held October 1994);
  results - SPOE 43%, OEVP 32.1%, FPOE 16.6%, GAL 4.5%, KPOE 0.7%, other
  3.1%; seats - (183 total) SPOE 80, OEVP 60, FPOE 33, GAL 10
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Judicial Court (Oberster Gerichtshof) for civil and criminal
  cases, Administrative Court (Verwaltungsgerichtshof) for bureaucratic
  cases, Constitutional Court (Verfassungsgerichtshof) for
  constitutional cases
Political parties and leaders: 
  Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPOE), Franz VRANITZKY, chairman;
  Austrian People's Party (OEVP), Erhard BUSEK, chairman; Freedom Party
  of Austria (FPOE), Joerg HAIDER, chairman; Communist Party (KPOE),
  Walter SILBERMAYER, chairman; Green Alternative List (GAL), Peter
  PILZ, chairman; Liberal Forum (LF), Heidi SCHMIDT
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Federal Chamber of Commerce and Industry; Austrian Trade Union
  Federation (primarily Socialist); three composite leagues of the
  Austrian People's Party (OEVP) representing business, labor, and
  farmers; OEVP-oriented League of Austrian Industrialists; Roman
  Catholic Church, including its chief lay organization, Catholic Action
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CEI, CERN,
  COCOM (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, G-9, GATT, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NAM
  (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNDOF, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMIG, UNTAC, UNTSO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Helmut TUERK 
chancery: 
  3524 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008-3035 
telephone: 
  (202) 895-6700 
FAX: 
  (202) 895-6750 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Swanee G. HUNT 
chancery: 
  Boltzmanngasse 16, A-1091, Vienna 
mailing address: 
  Unit 27937, Vienna 
telephone: 
  [43] (1) 313-39 
FAX: 
  [43] (1) 513-43-51 
consulate(s) general: 
  Salzburg 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and red

@Austria, Economy

Overview: 
  Austria boasts a prosperous and stable socialist market economy with a
  sizable but falling proportion of nationalized industry and extensive
  welfare benefits. Thanks to its raw material endowment, a technically
  skilled labor force, and strong links to German industrial firms,
  Austria occupies specialized niches in European industry and services
  (tourism, banking) and produces almost enough food to feed itself with
  only 8% of the labor force in agriculture. Increased export sales
  resulting from German unification, boosted Austria's economy through
  1991, but Austria's GDP growth slowed to 2% in 1992 and -0.5% in 1993
  due to the weak international economy, particularly in Germany - its
  largest trading partner. GDP growth will resume slowly in 1994, with
  estimates ranging from a 0.5% to a 1% increase. Unemployment has risen
  to 7% as a result of the slowdown and will continue to rise in 1994.
  Problems for the l990s include an aging population, the high level of
  subsidies, and the struggle to keep welfare benefits within budgetary
  capabilities. Austria's government has taken measures to make the
  economy more liberal and open by introducing a major tax reform,
  privatizing state-owned firms, and liberalizing cross-border capital
  movements. Although it will face increased competition, Austria should
  benefit from the continued opening of eastern European markets, as
  well as the 1 January 1994 start of the European Economic Area which
  extends the European Union rules on the free movement of people,
  capital, and goods and services to four members (including Austria) of
  the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). Austria has concluded
  membership negotiations with the European Union and is expected to
  join in early 1995, thus broadening European economic unity. The
  government, however, plans to hold a national referendum on the matter
  on 12 June 1994; support for and opposition to membership appears
  about equal.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $134.4 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.5% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $17,000 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.7% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  7% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $52.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $60.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $39.9 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, iron and steel, lumber, textiles, paper
  products, chemicals
partners: 
  EC 63.5% (Germany 38.9%), EFTA 9.0%, Eastern Europe/FSU 12.3%, Japan
  1.5%, US 3.35% (1993)
Imports: 
  $48.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  petroleum, foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, vehicles, chemicals,
  textiles and clothing, pharmaceuticals
partners: 
  EC 66.8% (Germany 41.3%), EFTA 6.7%, Eastern Europe/FSU 7.5%, Japan
  4.4%, US 4.4% (1993)
External debt: 
  $16.2 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -4.5% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  17,600,000 kW
production: 
  49.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,300 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  foods, iron and steel, machines, textiles, chemicals, electrical,
  paper and pulp, tourism, mining, motor vehicles
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 3.2% of GDP (including forestry); principal crops and
  animals - grains, fruit, potatoes, sugar beets, sawn wood, cattle,
  pigs, poultry; 80%-90% self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin transiting the Balkan
  route and Eastern Europe
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $2.4 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Austrian schilling (S) = 100 groschen
Exchange rates: 
  Austrian schillings (S) per US$1 - 12.255 (January 1994), 11.632
  (1993), 10.989 (1992), 11.676 (1991), 11.370 (1990), 13.231 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Austria, Communications

Railroads: 
  5,749 km total; 5,652 km government owned and 97 km privately owned
  (0.760-, 1.435- and 1.000-meter gauge); 5,394 km 1.435-meter standard
  gauge of which 3,154 km is electrified and 1,520 km is double tracked;
  339 km 0.760-meter narrow gauge of which 84 km is electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  95,412 km 
paved: 
  21,812 km (including 1,012 km of autobahn)
unpaved: 
  mostly gravel and earth 73,600 km 
Inland waterways: 
  446 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 554 km; petroleum products 171 km; natural gas 2,611 km 
Ports: 
  Vienna, Linz (Danube river ports)
Merchant marine: 
  29 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 158,724 GRT/259,594 DWT, bulk 3,
  cargo 23, oil tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  55 
usable: 
  55 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  20 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed and efficient; 4,014,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 6 AM, 21 (545 repeaters) FM, 47 (870 repeaters) TV;
  satellite ground stations for Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, Indian Ocean
  INTELSAT, and EUTELSAT systems

@Austria, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (including Flying Division) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,018,954; fit for military service 1,693,341; reach
  military age (19) annually 48,710 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.7 billion, 0.9% of GDP (1993)


@Azerbaijan, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Asia, between Armenia and Turkmenistan, bordering the
  Caspian Sea
Map references: 
  Africa, Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian
  States, Commonwealth of Independent States - European States, Middle
  East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  86,600 sq km 
land area: 
  86,100 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maine
note: 
  includes the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic and the Nagorno-Karabakh
  regions; regions' autonomy was abolished by Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet
  on 26 November 1991
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,013 km, Armenia (west) 566 km, Armenia (southwest) 221 km,
  Georgia 322 km, Iran (south) 432 km, Iran (southwest) 179 km, Russia
  284 km, Turkey 9 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
note: 
  Azerbaijan borders the Caspian Sea (800 km, est.)
Maritime claims: 
  NA
note: 
  Azerbaijani claims in Caspian Sea unknown; 10-nm fishing zone provided
  for in 1940 treaty regarding trade and navigation between Soviet Union
  and Iran
International disputes: 
  violent and longstanding dispute with ethnic Armenians of
  Nagorno-Karabakh over its status, lesser dispute concerns Nakhichevan;
  some Azerbaijanis desire absorption of and/or unification with the
  ethnic Azeri portion of Iran
Climate: 
  dry, semiarid steppe
Terrain: 
  large, flat Kur-Araz Lowland (much of it below sea level) with Great
  Caucasus Mountains to the north, Qarabag (Karabakh) Upland in west;
  Baku lies on Abseron (Apsheron) Peninsula that juts into Caspian Sea
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, nonferrous metals, alumina 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  18% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  25% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  53% 
Irrigated land: 
  14,010 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  local scientists consider the Abseron (Apsheron) Peninsula (including
  Baku and Sumqayit) and the Caspian Sea to be the ecologically most
  devastated area in the world because of severe air, water, and soil
  pollution; soil pollution results from the use of DDT as a pesticide
  and also from toxic defoliants used in the production of cotton
natural hazards: 
  subject to drought; some coastal areas threatened by rising levels of
  the Caspian Sea
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  landlocked

@Azerbaijan, People

Population: 
  7,684,456 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.41% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  23.04 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.58 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.38 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  34.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.85 years 
male: 
  67.08 years 
female: 
  74.8 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.7 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Azerbaijani(s) 
adjective: 
  Azerbaijani 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Azeri 82.7%, Russian 5.6%, Armenian 5.6%, Dagestani 3.2%, other 2.9%
  (1989)
note: 
  Armenian share is now approximately 0.3% because most Armenians have
  fled the ethnic violence since 1989 census; Russian percentage is
  probably half what it was for the same reason
Religions: 
  Muslim 87%, Russian Orthodox 5.6%, Armenian Orthodox 5.6%, other 1.8% 
Languages: 
  Azeri 82%, Russian 7%, Armenian 5%, other 6% 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  2.789 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and forestry 32%, industry and construction 26%, other 42%
  (1990)

@Azerbaijan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Azerbaijani Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Azerbaijan 
local long form: 
  Azarbaycan Respublikasi 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  AJ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Baku (Baky) 
Administrative divisions: 
  1 autonomous republic (avtomnaya respublika); Nakhichevan
  (administrative center at Nakhichevan)
note: 
  all rayons except for the exclave of Nakhichevan are under direct
  republic jurisdiction
Independence: 
  30 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Novruz Bayram, 21-22 March 
Constitution: 
  adopted NA April 1978; writing a new constitution mid-1993
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Heydar ALIYEV (since 18 June 1993 after President ELCIBEY
  left Baku for Nakhichevan); election last held 3 October 1993 (next to
  be held NA); results - Heydar ALIYEV won 97% of vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Surat HUSEYNOV (since 30 June 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president and confirmed by the
  Mejlas
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Milli Mejlis): 
  elections last held 30 September and 14 October 1990 for the Supreme
  Soviet (next expected to be held NA 1994 for the National Assembly);
  seats for Supreme Soviet - (360 total) Communists 280, Democratic Bloc
  45 (grouping of opposition parties), other 15, vacant 20; note - on 19
  May 1992 the Supreme Soviet was prorogued in favor of a Popular
  Front-dominated National Council; seats - (50 total) Popular Front 25,
  opposition elements 25
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Azerbaijan Popular Front (APF), Ebulfez ELCIBEY, chairman; Musavat
  Party, Isa GAMBAR, chairman; National Independence Party, Etibar
  MAMEDOV, chairman; Social Democratic Party (SDP), Araz ALIZADE,
  chairman; Communist Party, Ramiz AKHMEDOV, chairman; People's Freedom
  Party, Yunus OGUZ, chairman; Independent Social Democratic Party, Arif
  YUNUSOV and Leila YUNOSOVA, cochairmen; New Azerbaijan Party, Heydar
  ALIYEV, chairman; Boz Gurd Party, Iskander HAMIDOV, chairman;
  Azerbaijan Democratic Party, Sardar MAMEDOV, chairman; Azerbaijan
  Democratic Independence Party, Qabil HUSELNLI, chairman; Islamic Party
  of Azerbaijan, Ali Akram, chairman
Other political or pressure groups: 
  self-proclaimed Armenian Nagorno-Karabakh Republic; Talysh
  independence movement
Member of: 
  BSEC, CCC, CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDB, ILO,
  IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, NACC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU,
  WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Hafiz Mir Jalal Ogly PASHAYEV 
chancery: 
  Suite 700, 927 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 842-0001 
FAX: 
  (202) 842-0004 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard KAZLAURICH 
embassy: 
  Hotel Intourist, Baku 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  7-8922-92-63-06 through 09, extension 441, 442, 446, 447, 448, 450 
FAX: 
  Telex 142110 AMEMB SU 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), red, and green; a crescent
  and eight-pointed star in white are centered in red band

@Azerbaijan, Economy

Overview: 
  Azerbaijan is less developed industrially than either Armenia or
  Georgia, the other Transcaucasian states. It resembles the Central
  Asian states in its majority Muslim population, high structural
  unemployment, and low standard of living. The economy's most prominent
  products are oil, cotton, and gas. Production from the Caspian oil and
  gas field has been in decline for several years. With foreign
  assistance, the oil industry might generate the funds needed to spur
  industrial development. However, civil unrest, marked by armed
  conflict in the Nagorno-Karabakh region between Muslim Azeris and
  Christian Armenians, makes foreign investors wary. Azerbaijan
  accounted for 1.5% to 2% of the capital stock and output of the former
  Soviet Union. Azerbaijan shares all the formidable problems of the
  ex-Soviet republics in making the transition from a command to a
  market economy, but its considerable energy resources brighten its
  prospects somewhat. Old economic ties and structures have yet to be
  replaced. A particularly galling constraint on economic revival is the
  Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, said to consume 25% of Azerbaijan's
  economic resources.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $15.5 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Azerbaijani statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -13.3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,040 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  20% per month (average 1993); above 50% per month (February 1994)
Unemployment rate: 
  0.7% includes officially registered unemployed; also large numbers of
  underemployed workers (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $355 million to outside the FSU countries (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  oil and gas, chemicals, oilfield equipment, textiles, cotton (1991)
partners: 
  mostly CIS and European countries
Imports: 
  $240 million from outside the FSU countries (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and parts, consumer durables, foodstuffs, textiles (1991)
partners: 
  European countries
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -7% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,025,000 kW
production: 
  22,300 kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,990 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum and natural gas, petroleum products, oilfield equipment;
     steel, iron ore, cement; chemicals and petrochemicals; textiles
iculture: 
  cotton, grain, rice, grapes, fruit, vegetables, tea, tobacco; cattle,
  pigs, sheep and goats
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for CIS
  consumption; limited government eradication program; transshipment
  point for illicit drugs to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  wheat from Turkey
Currency: 
  1 manat = 100 gopik
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Azerbaijan, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,090 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  36,700 km 
paved or graveled: 
  31,800 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 4,900 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,130 km; petroleum products 630 km; natural gas 1,240 km 
Ports: 
  inland - Baku (Baky)
Airports: 
total: 
  65 
usable: 
  33 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  26 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  8 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  23 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic telephone service is of poor quality and inadequate; 710,000
  domestic telephone lines [density - 9 lines per 100 persons (1991)],
  202,000 persons waiting for telephone installations (January 1991);
  connections to other former USSR republics by cable and microwave and
  to other countries via the Moscow international gateway switch;
  INTELSAT earth station installed in late 1992 in Baku with Turkish
  financial assistance with access to 200 countries through Turkey;
  since August 1993 an earth station near Baku has provided direct
  communications with New York through Russia's Stationar-11 satellite;
  a joint venture to establish a cellular telephone system (Bakcel) in
  the Baku area is supposed to become operational in 1994; domestic and
  Russian TV programs are received locally and Turkish and Iranian TV is
  received from an INTELSAT satellite through a receive-only earth
  station

@Azerbaijan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, Navy, Maritime Border Guard, National Guard, Security
  Forces (internal and border troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,884,458; fit for military service 1,525,123; reach
  military age (18) annually 68,192 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  2,848 million rubles, NA% of GDP (1992 est.); note - conversion of the
  military budget into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@The Bahamas, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the western North Atlantic Ocean, southeast of Florida
  and northwest of Cuba
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  13,940 sq km 
land area: 
  10,070 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  3,542 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; moderated by warm waters of Gulf Stream
Terrain: 
  long, flat coral formations with some low rounded hills
Natural resources: 
  salt, aragonite, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  32% 
other: 
  67% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes and other tropical storms that cause extensive
  flood and wind damage
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
Note: 
  strategic location adjacent to US and Cuba; extensive island chain

@The Bahamas, People

Population: 
  273,055 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.57% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  18.86 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.24 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  33.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.52 years 
male: 
  67.66 years 
female: 
  75.49 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.88 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bahamian(s) 
adjective: 
  Bahamian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 85%, white 15% 
Religions: 
  Baptist 32%, Anglican 20%, Roman Catholic 19%, Methodist 6%, Church of
  God 6%, other Protestant 12%, none or unknown 3%, other 2% 
Languages: 
  English, Creole (among Haitian immigrants)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over but definition of literacy not available (1963 est.)
total population: 
  90% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  89% 
Labor force: 
  127,400 
by occupation: 
  government 30%, hotels and restaurants 25%, business services 10%,
  agriculture 5% (1989)

@The Bahamas, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
   Commonwealth of The Bahamas 
conventional short form: 
  The Bahamas 
Digraph: 
  BF
Type: 
  commonwealth 
Capital: 
  Nassau 
Administrative divisions: 
  21 districts; Acklins and Crooked Islands, Bimini, Cat Island, Exuma,
  Freeport, Fresh Creek, Governor's Harbour, Green Turtle Cay, Harbour
  Island, High Rock, Inagua, Kemps Bay, Long Island, Marsh Harbour,
  Mayaguana, New Providence, Nichollstown and Berry Islands, Ragged
  Island, Rock Sound, Sandy Point, San Salvador and Rum Cay
Independence: 
  10 July 1973 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 10 July (1973) 
Constitution: 
  10 July 1973
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Sir Clifford DARLING (since 2 January 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Hubert A. INGRAHAM (since 19 August 1992); Deputy Prime
  Minister Orville A. TURNQUEST (since 19 August 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor on the prime minister's
  recommendation
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  a 16-member body appointed by the governor general
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 19 August 1992 (next to be held by August 1997);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (49 total) FNM 32, PLP
  17
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Progressive Liberal Party (PLP), Sir Lynden O. PINDLING; Free National
  Movement (FNM), Hubert Alexander INGRAHAM; 
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CCC, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAS,
  OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Timothy Baswell DONALDSON 
chancery: 
  2220 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 319-2660 
FAX: 
  (202) 319-2668 
consulate(s) general: 
  Miami and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Lino GUTIERREZ 
embassy: 
  Mosmar Building, Queen Street, Nassau 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box N-8197, Nassau 
telephone: 
  (809) 322-1181 or 328-2206 
FAX: 
  (809) 328-7838 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of aquamarine (top), gold, and aquamarine
  with a black equilateral triangle based on the hoist side

@The Bahamas, Economy

Overview: 
  The Bahamas is a stable, developing nation whose economy is based
  primarily on tourism and offshore banking. Tourism alone provides
  about 40% of GDP and directly or indirectly employs about 50,000
  people or 40% of the local work force. The economy has slackened in
  recent years, as the annual increase in the number of tourists slowed.
  Nonetheless, per capita GDP is one of the highest in the region.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $4.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $16,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6.5% (1991)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.7% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $628.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $574 million, including capital expenditures of $100 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $310 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  pharmaceuticals, cement, rum, crawfish
partners: 
  US 51%, UK 7%, Norway 7%, France 6%, Italy 5%
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (f.o.b,,1992)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods, mineral fuels, crude oil
partners: 
  US 32%, Japan 17%, Nigeria 12%, Denmark 7%, Norway 6%
External debt: 
  $1.2 billion (December 1990)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3% (1990); accounts for 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  424,000 kW
production: 
  929 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,599 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, banking, cement, oil refining and transshipment, salt
  production, rum, aragonite, pharmaceuticals, spiral welded steel pipe
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 5% of GDP; dominated by small-scale producers; principal
  products - citrus fruit, vegetables, poultry; large net importer of
  food
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for US and Europe;
  also money-laundering center
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY85-89), $1 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $345
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Bahamian dollar (B$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Bahamian dollar (B$) per US$1 - 1.00 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@The Bahamas, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,400 km 
paved: 
  1,350 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,050 km 
Ports: 
  Freeport, Nassau
Merchant marine: 
  879 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 20,424,439 GRT/33,330,160 DWT,
  bulk 167, cargo 148, chemical tanker 43, combination bulk 8,
  combination ore/oil 20, container 48, liquefied gas 18, oil tanker
  177, passenger 54, refrigerated cargo 132, roll-on/roll-off cargo 41,
  short-sea passenger 16, vehicle carrier 7 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  60 
usable: 
  55 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  31 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  26 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed; 99,000 telephones in totally automatic system;
  tropospheric scatter and submarine cable links to Florida; broadcast
  stations - 3 AM, 2 FM, 1 TV; 3 coaxial submarine cables; 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@The Bahamas, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Bahamas Defense Force (Coast Guard only), Royal Bahamas Police
  Force 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $65 million, 2.7% of GDP (1990)


@Bahrain, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, in the central Persian Gulf, between Saudi Arabia and
  Qatar
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  620 sq km 
land area: 
  620 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  161 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  territorial dispute with Qatar over the Hawar Islands; maritime
  boundary with Qatar
Climate: 
  arid; mild, pleasant winters; very hot, humid summers
Terrain: 
  mostly low desert plain rising gently to low central escarpment
Natural resources: 
  oil, associated and nonassociated natural gas, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  90% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification resulting from the degradation of limited arable land,
  periods of drought, and dust storms; coastal degradation (damage to
  coastlines, coral reefs, and sea vegetation) resulting from oil spills
  and other discharges from large tankers, oil refineries, and
  distribution stations; no surface water resources; groundwater and sea
  water are the only sources for all water needs
natural hazards: 
  periods of drought, dust storms
international agreements: 
  party to - Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  close to primary Middle Eastern petroleum sources; strategic location
  in Persian Gulf through which much of Western world's petroleum must
  transit to reach open ocean

@Bahrain, People

Population: 
  585,683 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.96% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  26.59 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  3.83 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  6.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  19 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.51 years 
male: 
  71.1 years 
female: 
  76.05 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.96 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bahraini(s) 
adjective: 
  Bahraini 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Bahraini 63%, Asian 13%, other Arab 10%, Iranian 8%, other 6% 
Religions: 
  Shi'a Muslim 70%, Sunni Muslim 30% 
Languages: 
  Arabic, English, Farsi, Urdu 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  77% 
male: 
  82% 
female: 
  69% 
Labor force: 
  140,000 
by occupation: 
  industry and commerce 85%, agriculture 5%, services 5%, government 3%
  (1982)
note: 
  42% of labor force is Bahraini

@Bahrain, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  State of Bahrain 
conventional short form: 
  Bahrain 
local long form: 
  Dawlat al Bahrayn 
local short form: 
  Al Bahrayn 
Digraph: 
  BA
Type: 
  traditional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Manama 
Administrative divisions: 
  12 districts (manatiq, singular - mintaqah); Al Hadd, Al Manamah, Al
  Mintaqah al Gharbiyah, Al Mintaqah al Wusta, Al Mintaqah ash
  Shamaliyah, Al Muharraq, Ar Rifa'wa al Mintaqah al Janubiyah, Jidd
  Hafs, Madinat Hamad, Madinat 'Isa, Mintaqat Juzur Hawar, Sitrah
Independence: 
  15 August 1971 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 16 December (1961) 
Constitution: 
  26 May 1973, effective 6 December 1973
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law and English common law
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Amir ISA bin Salman Al Khalifa (since 2 November 1961); Heir Apparent
  HAMAD bin Isa bin Salman Al Khalifa (son of the Amir, born 28 January
  1950) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister KHALIFA bin Salman Al Khalifa (since 19 January 1970) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral National Assembly was dissolved 26 August 1975 and
  legislative powers were assumed by the Cabinet; appointed Advisory
  Council established 16 December 1992  
Judicial branch: 
  High Civil Appeals Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  political parties prohibited; several small, clandestine leftist and
  Islamic fundamentalist groups are active
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GATT, GCC, IBRD, ICAO, IDB,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC,
  ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mohammad ABD al-GHAFFAR 
chancery: 
  3502 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 342-0741 or 342-0742 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires David S. ROBINS 
embassy: 
  Road No. 3119 (next to Alahli Sports Club), Zinj District, Manama 
mailing address: 
  FPO AE 09834-5100; P.O. Box 26431, Manama 
telephone: 
  [973] 273-300 
FAX: 
  (973) 272-594 
Flag: 
  red with a white serrated band (eight white points) on the hoist side

@Bahrain, Economy

Overview: 
  Petroleum production and processing account for about 80% of export
  receipts, 60% of government revenues, and 30% of GDP. Economic
  conditions have fluctuated with the changing fortunes of oil since
  1985, for example, during and following the Gulf crisis of 1990-91.
  Bahrain with its highly developed communication and transport
  facilities is home to numerous multinational firms with business in
  the Gulf. A large share of exports consists of petroleum products made
  from imported crude. Prospects for 1994 are good, with private
  enterprise the main driving force, e.g., in banking and construction.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $12,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  8%-10% (1989)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $3.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum and petroleum products 80%, aluminum 7%
partners: 
  Japan 13%, UAE 12%, India 10%, Pakistan 8%, Singapore 6% (1991)
Imports: 
  $3.7 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  nonoil 59%, crude oil 41%
partners: 
  Saudi Arabia 42%, US 14%, UK 7%, Japan 5%, Germany 4% (1991)
External debt: 
  $2.6 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.8% (1988); accounts for 44% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,600,000 kW
production: 
  4.7 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,500 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum processing and refining, aluminum smelting, offshore
  banking, ship repairing
Agriculture: 
  including fishing, accounts for less than 2% of GDP; not
  self-sufficient in food production; heavily subsidized sector produces
  fruit, vegetables, poultry, dairy products, shrimp, fish
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-79), $24 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $45
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $9.8 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Bahraini dinar (BD) = 1,000 fils
Exchange rates: 
  Bahraini dinars (BD) per US$1 - 0.3760 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Bahrain, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  bituminous 200 km 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 56 km; petroleum products 16 km; natural gas 32 km 
Ports: 
  Mina' Salman, Manama, Sitrah
Merchant marine: 
  6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 101,844 GRT/143,997 DWT, bulk 1,
  cargo 4, container 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system; good domestic services; 98,000 telephones (1 for every
  6 persons); excellent international connections; tropospheric scatter
  to Qatar, UAE; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia; submarine cable
  to Qatar, UAE, and Saudi Arabia; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 ARABSAT; broadcast stations
  - 2 AM, 3 FM, 2 TV

@Bahrain, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 198,414; fit for military service 109,431; reach
  military age (15) annually 5,093 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $245 million, 6% of GDP (1993)


@Baker Island

Header

Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Baker Island, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, just north of the
  Equator, 2,575 km southwest of Honolulu, about halfway between Hawaii
  and Australia
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.4 sq km 
land area: 
  1.4 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 2.3 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  4.8 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
     none
mate: 
     equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun
rain: 
     low, nearly level coral island surrounded by a narrow fringing reef
ural resources: 
     guano (deposits worked until 1891) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lacks fresh water
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  treeless, sparse, and scattered vegetation consisting of grasses,
  prostrate vines, and low growing shrubs; primarily a nesting,
  roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds, and marine
  wildlife

@Baker Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited; note - American civilians evacuated in 1942 after
  Japanese air and naval attacks during World War II; occupied by US
  military during World War II, but abandoned after the war; public
  entry is by special-use permit only and generally restricted to
  scientists and educators; a cemetery and cemetery ruins are located
  near the middle of the west coast

@Baker Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Baker Island 
Digraph: 
  FQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the Fish and
  Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the
  National Wildlife Refuge system
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC

@Baker Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Baker Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only, one boat landing area along the middle
  of the west coast
Airports: 
  1 abandoned World War II runway of 1,665 m
Note: 
  there is a day beacon near the middle of the west coast

@Baker Island, Defense Forces

  defense is the responsibility of the US; visited annually by the US
  Coast Guard


@Bangladesh, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, at the head of the Bay of Bengal, almost completely
  surrounded by India
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  144,000 sq km 
land area: 
  133,910 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Wisconsin
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,246 km, Burma 193 km, India 4,053 km 
Coastline: 
  580 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  18 nm
continental shelf: 
  up to outer limits of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  a portion of the boundary with India is in dispute; water-sharing
  problems with upstream riparian India over the Ganges
Climate: 
  tropical; cool, dry winter (October to March); hot, humid summer
  (March to June); cool, rainy monsoon (June to October)
Terrain: 
  mostly flat alluvial plain; hilly in southeast
Natural resources: 
  natural gas, arable land, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  67% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  16% 
other: 
  11% 
Irrigated land: 
  27,380 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  many people are landless and forced to live on and cultivate
  flood-prone land; limited access to potable water; water-borne
  diseases prevalent; water pollution especially of fishing areas
  results from the use of commercial pesticides; intermittent water
  shortages because of falling water tables in the northern and central
  parts of the country; soil degradation; deforestation; severe
  overpopulation
natural hazards: 
  vulnerable to droughts, cyclones; much of the country routinely
  flooded during the summer monsoon season
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea

@Bangladesh, People

Population: 
  125,149,469 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.33% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  35.02 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.68 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  106.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  55.08 years 
male: 
  55.35 years 
female: 
  54.8 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.47 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bangladeshi(s) 
adjective: 
  Bangladesh 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Bengali 98%, Biharis 250,000, tribals less than 1 million
Religions: 
  Muslim 83%, Hindu 16%, Buddhist, Christian, other 
Languages: 
  Bangla (official), English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  35% 
male: 
  47% 
female: 
  22% 
Labor force: 
  50.1 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 65%, services 21%, industry and mining 14% (1989)
note: 
  extensive export of labor to Saudi Arabia, UAE, and Oman (1991)

@Bangladesh, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  People's Republic of Bangladesh 
conventional short form: 
  Bangladesh 
former: 
  East Pakistan 
Digraph: 
  BG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Dhaka 
Administrative divisions: 
  64 districts (zillagulo, singular - zilla); Bagerhat, Bandarban,
  Barguna, Barisal, Bhola, Bogra, Brahmanbaria, Chandpur, Chapai
  Nawabganj, Chattagram, Chuadanga, Comilla, Cox's Bazar, Dhaka,
  Dinajpur, Faridpur, Feni, Gaibandha, Gazipur, Gopalganj, Habiganj,
  Jaipurhat, Jamalpur, Jessore, Jhalakati, Jhenaidah, Khagrachari,
  Khulna, Kishorganj, Kurigram, Kushtia, Laksmipur, Lalmonirhat,
  Madaripur, Magura, Manikganj, Meherpur, Moulavibazar, Munshiganj,
  Mymensingh, Naogaon, Narail, Narayanganj, Narsingdi, Nator, Netrakona,
  Nilphamari, Noakhali, Pabna, Panchagar, Parbattya Chattagram,
  Patuakhali, Pirojpur, Rajbari, Rajshahi, Rangpur, Satkhira,
  Shariyatpur, Sherpur, Sirajganj, Sunamganj, Sylhet, Tangail,
  Thakurgaon
Independence: 
  16 December 1971 (from Pakistan)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 26 March (1971) 
Constitution: 
  4 November 1972, effective 16 December 1972, suspended following coup
  of 24 March 1982, restored 10 November 1986, amended many times
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Abdur Rahman BISWAS (since 8 October 1991); election last
  held 8 October 1991 (next to be held by NA October 1996); results -
  Abdur Rahman BISWAS received 52.1% of parliamentary vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Khaleda ZIAur RAHMAN (since 20 March 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Parliament (Jatiya Sangsad): 
  elections last held 27 February 1991 (next to be held NA February
  1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (330 total, 300
  elected and 30 seats reserved for women) BNP 168, AL 93, JP 35, JI 20,
  BCP 5, National Awami Party (Muzaffar) 1, Workers Party 1, JSD 1,
  Ganotantri Party 1, Islami Oikya Jote 1, NDP 1, independents 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), Khaleda ZIAur RAHMAN; Awami League
  (AL), Sheikh Hasina WAJED; Jatiyo Party (JP), Hussain Mohammad ERSHAD
  (in jail); Jamaat-E-Islami (JI), Ali KHAN; Bangladesh Communist Party
  (BCP), Saifuddin Ahmed MANIK; National Awami Party (Muzaffar); Workers
  Party, leader NA; Jatiyo Samajtantik Dal (JSD), Serajul ALAM KHAN;
  Ganotantri Party, leader NA; Islami Oikya Jote, leader NA; National
  Democratic Party (NDP), leader NA; Muslim League, Khan A. SABUR;
  Democratic League, Khondakar MUSHTAQUE Ahmed; Democratic League,
  Khondakar MUSHTAQUE Ahmed; United People's Party, Kazi ZAFAR Ahmed
Member of: 
  AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO,
  ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OIC, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNIKOM, UNOMIG, UNOMOZ, UNOMUR, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, WCL,
  WHO, WFTU, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Abul AHSAN 
chancery: 
  2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 342-8372 through 8376 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador David MERRILL 
embassy: 
  Diplomatic Enclave, Madani Avenue, Baridhara, Dhaka 
mailing address: 
  G. P. O. Box 323, Dhaka 1212 
telephone: 
  [880] (2) 884700-22 
FAX: 
  [880] (2) 883-744 
Flag: 
  green with a large red disk slightly to the hoist side of center;
  green is the traditional color of Islam

@Bangladesh, Economy

Overview: 
  Bangladesh is one of the world's poorest, most densely populated, and
  least developed nations. Its economy is overwhelmingly agricultural,
  with the cultivation of rice the single most important activity in the
  economy. Major impediments to growth include frequent cyclones and
  floods, government interference with the economy, a rapidly growing
  labor force that cannot be absorbed by agriculture, a low level of
  industrialization, failure to fully exploit energy resources (natural
  gas), and inefficient and inadequate power supplies. Excellent rice
  crops and expansion of the export garment industry helped growth in
  FY92 and FY93. Policy reforms intended to reduce government regulation
  of private industry and promote public-sector efficiency have been
  announced but are being implemented only slowly.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $122 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.3% (FY93)
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.4% (FY93)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY92)
Exports: 
  $2.1 billion (FY93)
commodities: 
  garments, jute and jute goods, leather, shrimp
partners: 
  US 33%, Western Europe 39% (Germany 8.4%, Italy 6%) (FY92 est.)
Imports: 
  $3.5 billion (FY93)
commodities: 
  capital goods, petroleum, food, textiles
partners: 
  Hong Kong 7.5%, Singapore 7.4%, China 7.4%, Japan 7.1% (FY92 est.)
External debt: 
  $13.5 billion (June 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.9% (FY93 est.); accounts for 9.4% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,400,000 kW
production: 
  9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  75 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  jute manufacturing, cotton textiles, food processing, steel,
  fertilizer
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 33% of GDP, 65% of employment, and one-fifth of exports;
  world's largest exporter of jute; commercial products - jute, rice,
  wheat, tea, sugarcane, potatoes, beef, milk, poultry; shortages
  include wheat, vegetable oils, cotton
Illicit drugs: 
  transit country for illegal drugs produced in neighboring countries
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $3.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1980-89),
  $11.65 million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $6.52 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $1.5 billion 
Currency: 
  1 taka (Tk) = 100 poiska
Exchange rates: 
  taka (Tk) per US$1 - 40.064 (January 1994), 39.567 (1993), 38.951
  (1992), 36.596 (1991), 34.569 (1990), 32.270 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Bangladesh, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,892 km total (1986); 1,914 km 1.000 meter gauge, 978 km 1.676 meter
  broad gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  7,240 km 
paved: 
  3,840 km 
unpaved: 
  3,400 km (1985)
Inland waterways: 
  5,150-8,046 km navigable waterways (includes 2,575-3,058 km main cargo
  routes)
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 1,220 km 
Ports: 
  Chittagong, Chalna
Merchant marine: 
  41 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 312,172 GRT/458,131 DWT, bulk 3,
  cargo 33, oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 3 
Airports: 
total: 
  16 
usable: 
  12 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  6 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate international radio communications and landline service; poor
  domestic telephone service; 241.250 telephones - only one telephone
  for each 522 persons; fair broadcast service; broadcast stations - 9
  AM, 6 FM, 11 TV; 2 Indian Ocean INTELSAT satellite earth stations

@Bangladesh, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force 
paramilitary forces: 
  Bangladesh Rifles, Bangladesh Ansars, Armed Police Reserve, Defense
  Parties, National Cadet Corps 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 31,955,948; fit for military service 18,967,602 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $355 million, 1.5% of GDP (FY92/93)


@Barbados, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the extreme eastern Caribbean Sea, about 375 km
  northeast of Venezuela
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  430 sq km 
land area: 
  430 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  97 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy season (June to October)
Terrain: 
  relatively flat; rises gently to central highland region
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, fishing, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  77% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  9% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  14% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  pollution of coastal waters from waste disposal by ships; soil
  erosion; illegal solid waste disposal threatens contamination of
  aquifers
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes (especially June to October); periodic
  landslides
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity
Note: 
  easternmost Caribbean island

@Barbados, People

Population: 
  255,827 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.21% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.63 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.4 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -5.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.83 years 
male: 
  71.11 years 
female: 
  76.76 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.78 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Barbadian(s) 
adjective: 
  Barbadian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 80%, European 4%, other 16% 
Religions: 
  Protestant 67% (Anglican 40%, Pentecostal 8%, Methodist 7%, other
  12%), Roman Catholic 4%, none 17%, unknown 3%, other 9% (1980)
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  120,900 (1991)
by occupation: 
  services and government 37%, commerce 22%, manufacturing and
  construction 22%, transportation, storage, communications, and
  financial institutions 9%, agriculture 8%, utilities 2% (1985 est.)

@Barbados, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Barbados 
Digraph: 
  BB
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Bridgetown 
Administrative divisions: 
  11 parishes; Christ Church, Saint Andrew, Saint George, Saint James,
  Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint Lucy, Saint Michael, Saint Peter,
  Saint Philip, Saint Thomas
note: 
  the new city of Bridgetown may be given parish status
Independence: 
  30 November 1966 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 30 November (1966) 
Constitution: 
  30 November 1966
Legal system: 
  English common law; no judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Dame Nita BARROW (since 6 June 1990) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Lloyd Erskine SANDIFORD (since 2 June 1987); Deputy
  Prime Minister Philip Marlowe GREAVES (since 2 June 1987) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on advice of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  consists of a 21-member body appointed by the governor general
House of Assembly: 
  election last held 22 January 1991 (next to be held by January 1996);
  results - DLP 49.8%; seats - (28 total) DLP 18, BLP 10
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Judicature 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Labor Party (DLP), Erskine SANDIFORD; Barbados Labor Party
  (BLP), Owen ARTHUR; National Democratic Party (NDP), Richie HAYNES
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Barbados Workers Union, Leroy TROTMAN; People's Progressive Movement,
  Eric SEALY; Workers' Party of Barbados, Dr. George BELLE; Clement
  Payne Labor Union, David COMMISSIONG
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dr. Rudi Valentine WEBSTER 
chancery: 
  2144 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-9200 through 9202 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
consulate(s): 
  Los Angeles 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jeanette W. HYDE 
embassy: 
  Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Building, Broad Street, Bridgetown 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 302, Bridgetown; FPO AA 34055 
telephone: 
  (809) 436-4950 
FAX: 
  (809) 429-5246 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and blue with
  the head of a black trident centered on the gold band; the trident
  head represents independence and a break with the past (the colonial
  coat of arms contained a complete trident)

@Barbados, Economy

Overview: 
  A per capita income of $8,700 gives Barbados one of the highest
  standards of living of all the small island states of the eastern
  Caribbean. Historically, the economy was based on the cultivation of
  sugar cane and related activities. In recent years, however, the
  economy has diversified into manufacturing and tourism. The tourist
  industry is now a major employer of the labor force and a primary
  source of foreign exchange. The economy slowed in 1990-92 as
  Bridgetown's difficulty in financing its deficits caused it to exert
  control over domestic demands
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -3% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $8,700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6.1% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  23% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $547 million 
expenditures: 
  $620 million, including capital expenditures of $60 million (FY92-93)
Exports: 
  $158 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  sugar and molasses, rum, other foods and beverages, chemicals,
  electrical components, clothing
partners: 
  US 13%, UK 13%, Trinidad and Tobago 9%, Windward Islands 7.8%
Imports: 
  $465 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery, foodstuffs, construction materials, chemicals, fuel,
  electrical components
partners: 
  US 33%, UK 11%, Trinidad and Tobago 11%, Japan 5%
External debt: 
  $652 million (1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1.3% (1991); accounts for 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  152,100 kW
production: 
  540 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,118 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, sugar, light manufacturing, component assembly for export,
  petroleum
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 6% of GDP; major cash crop is sugarcane; other crops -
  vegetables, cotton; not self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $15 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $171
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Barbadian dollar (Bds$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Barbadian dollars (Bds$) per US$1 - 2.0113 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Barbados, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,570 km 
paved: 
  1,475 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 95 km 
Ports: 
  Bridgetown
Merchant marine: 
  2 oil tankers (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 44,466 GRT/76,219 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  island wide automatic telephone system with 89,000 telephones;
  tropospheric scatter link to Trinidad and Saint Lucia; broadcast
  stations - 3 AM, 2 FM, 2 (1 is pay) TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  earth station

@Barbados, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Barbados Defense Force, including the Ground Forces and Coast
  Guard, Royal Barbados Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 70,751; fit for military service 49,330 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $10 million, 0.7% of GDP (1989)


@Bassas da India

Header
Affiliation: 
  (possession of France) 

@Bassas da India, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the southern Mozambique Channel about halfway
  between Madagascar and Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa 
Area: 
total area: 
  NA km2
land area: 
  NA km2
comparative area: 
  NA
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  35.2 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Madagascar
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  a volcanic rock 2.4 meters high
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (all rock)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  surrounded by reefs; subject to periodic cyclones
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  navigational hazard since it is usually under water during high tide

@Bassas da India, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Bassas da India, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Bassas da India 
Digraph: 
  BS
Type: 
  French possession administered by a Commissioner of the Republic,
  resident in Reunion
Capital: 
  none; administered by France from Reunion
Independence: 
  none (possession of France)

@Bassas da India, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Bassas da India, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only

@Bassas da India, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Belarus, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Europe, between Poland and Russia
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - European States, Europe,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  207,600 sq km 
land area: 
  207,600 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Kansas
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,098 km, Latvia 141 km, Lithuania 502 km, Poland 605 km, Russia
  959 km, Ukraine 891 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  cold winters, cool and moist summers; transitional between continental
  and maritime
Terrain: 
  generally flat and contains much marshland
Natural resources: 
  forest land, peat deposits 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  29% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  15% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  55% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,490 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil pollution from pesticide use; southern part of Belarus
  contaminated with fallout from 1986 nuclear reactor accident at
  Chornobyl'
natural hazards: 
     NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Biodiversity, Environmental Modification, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified - Climate
  Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked

@Belarus, People

Population: 
  10,404,862 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.32% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.12 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.16 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.88 years 
male: 
  66.2 years 
female: 
  75.79 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.88 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Belarusian(s) 
adjective: 
  Belarusian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Byelorussian 77.9%, Russian 13.2%, Polish 4.1%, Ukrainian 2.9%, other
  1.9% 
Religions: 
  Eastern Orthodox, other 
Languages: 
  Byelorussian, Russian, other 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1979)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  4.887 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 40%, agriculture and forestry 21%, other 39%
  (1992)

@Belarus, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Belarus 
conventional short form: 
  Belarus 
local long form: 
  Respublika Byelarus' 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Belorussian (Byelorussian) Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  BO
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Minsk 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 voblastsi (singular - voblasts') and one municipality* (harady,
  singular - horad); Brestskaya (Brest), Homyel'skaya (Homyel'), Horad
  Minsk*, Hrodzyenskaya (Hrodna), Mahilyowskaya (Mahilyow), Minskaya,
  Vitsyebskaya (Vitsyebsk)
note: 
  the administrative centers of the voblastsi are included in
  parentheses
Independence: 
  25 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 July (1990) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 15 March 1994; replaces constitution of April 1978
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President-elect Aleksandr LUKASHENKO (elected 10 July 1994, but not
  yet inaugurated) election held June 24 and 10 July 1994 (next to be
  held NA); Aleksandr LUKASHENKO 80%, Vyacheslav KEBICH 14%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Vyacheslav F. KEBICH (since NA April 1990; offered his
  resignation on the election of LUCHASHENKO), First Deputy Prime
  Minister Mikhail MYASNIKOVICH (since NA 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
note: 
  first presidential elections took place in June-July 1994
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme Soviet: 
  elections last held 4 April 1990 (next to be held NA); results -
  Communists 87%; seats - (360 total) number of seats by party NA; note
  - 50 seats are for public bodies; the Communist Party obtained an
  overwhelming majority
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Belarusian Popular Front (BPF), Zenon PAZNYAK, chairman; United
  Democratic Party of Belarus (UDPB), Aleksandr DOBROVOLSKIY, chairman;
  Social Democratic Party of Belarus (SDBP), Mikhail TKACHEV, chairman;
  Belarus Workers Union, Mikhail SOBOL, Chairman; Belarus Peasants
  Party; Party of People's Unity, Gennadiy KARPENKO; Movement for
  Democracy, Social Progress, and Justice (DSPS; includes the Communist
  Party), Viktor CHIKIN, chairman
Member of: 
  CBSS (observer), CE (guest), CEI (participating), CIS, CSCE, ECE,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IFC, ILO, IMF, INMARSAT, INTELSAT (nonsignatory
  user), IOC, ITU, NACC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Sergey Nikolayevich MARTYNOV 
chancery: 
  1619 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 986-1604 
FAX: 
  (202) 986-1805) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires George KROL 
embassy: 
  Starovilenskaya #46, Minsk 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  7-0172-34-65-37 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of white (top), red, and white

@Belarus, Economy
Overview: 
  Belarus ranks among the most developed of the former Soviet states,
  with a relatively modern - by Soviet standards - and diverse machine
  building sector and a robust agriculture sector. It also serves as a
  transport link for Russian oil exports to the Baltic states and
  Eastern and Western Europe. The breakup of the Soviet Union and its
  command economy has resulted in a sharp economic contraction as
  traditional trade ties have collapsed. At the same time, the
  Belarusian Government has lagged behind most other former Soviet
  states in economic reform; privatization has barely begun; the
  agriculture sector remains highly subsidized; the state retains
  control over many prices; and the system of state orders and
  distribution persists. Meanwhile, the national bank continues to pour
  credits into inefficient enterprises, fueling inflation and weakening
  incentives to improve performance. The government is pinning its hopes
  on reintegration with the Russian economy, but such a path would only
  partially restore traditional trade ties. Until economic reform is
  embraced, Belarus will continue in its economic morass.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $61 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Belarusian statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -9% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,890 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  30% per month (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  1.4% officially registered unemployed (December 1993); large numbers
  of underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $710 million to outside of the FSU countries (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, foodstuffs
partners: 
  Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Bulgaria
Imports: 
  $743 million from outside the FSU countries (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  fuel, industrial raw materials, textiles, sugar
partners: 
  Russia, Ukraine, Poland
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -11% (1993); accounts for about 40% of GDP (1992)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  8,025,000 kW
production: 
  37.6 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,626 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  employ about 40% of labor force and produce a wide variety of products
  including (in percent share of total output of former Soviet Union):
  tractors (12%); metal-cutting machine tools (11%); off-highway dump
  trucks up to 110-metric-ton load capacity (100%); wheel-type
  earthmovers for construction and mining (100%); eight-wheel-drive,
  high-flotation trucks with cargo capacity of 25 metric tons for use in
  tundra and roadless areas (100%); equipment for animal husbandry and
  livestock feeding (25%); motorcycles (21.3%); television sets (11%);
  chemical fibers (28%); fertilizer (18%); linen fabric (11%); wool
  fabric (7%); radios; refrigerators; and other consumer goods
Agriculture: 
  accounts for almost 25% of GDP and 5.7% of total agricultural output
  of former Soviet Union; employs 21% of the labor force; in 1988
  produced the following (in percent of total Soviet production): grain
  (3.6%), potatoes (12.2%), vegetables (3.0%), meat (6.0%), milk (7.0%);
  net exporter of meat, milk, eggs, flour, potatoes
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of opium poppy and cannabis; mostly for the
  domestic market; transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western
  Europe
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  Belarusian rubel
note: 
  the government signed a framework agreement with Russia for a monetary
  union in January 1994, but a schedule and mechanism for merging the
  two monetary systems and replacing Belarusian rubels with Russian
  rubles have not been worked out
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Belarus, Communications

Railroads: 
  5,570 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  98,200 km 
paved: 
  66,100 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 32,100 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  NA km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,470 km; refined products 1,100 km; natural gas 1,980 km
  (1992)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Merchant marine: 
  claims 5% of former Soviet fleet
Airports: 
total: 
  124 
usable: 
  55 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  31 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  28 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  20 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  telephone service in Belarus is inadequate for the purposes of either
  business or the population; total number of telephones 1,849,000 (31
  December 1991); telephone density - 18 for each 100 persons; about 70%
  of the telephones are in homes; over 750,000 applications from
  households for telephones remain unsatisfied (1992); new investment
  centers on international connections and business needs; the new
  BelCel NMT 450 cellular system (a joint venture) is now operating in
  Minsk but progress has been slower in establishing an INTELSAT earth
  station; international traffic still relies on the Moscow
  international gateway switch; broadcast receivers - television
  3,538,000, radio 3,140,000, radio receivers with multiple speaker
  systems for program diffusion 5,615,000

@Belarus, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Forces, Air Defense Forces, Security Forces (internal and
  border troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,520,487; fit for military service 1,981,749; reach
  military age (18) annually 71,922 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  56.5 billion rubles, NA% of GDP (1993 est.); note - conversion of the
  military budget into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Belgium, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, bordering on the North Sea, between France and the
  Netherlands
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  30,510 sq km 
land area: 
  30,230 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,385 km, France 620 km, Germany 167 km, Luxembourg 148 km,
  Netherlands 450 km 
Coastline: 
  64 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  equidistant line with neighbors
exclusive fishing zone: 
  equidistant line with neighbors (extends about 68 km from coast)
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; mild winters, cool summers; rainy, humid, cloudy
Terrain: 
  flat coastal plains in northwest, central rolling hills, rugged
  mountains of Ardennes Forest in southeast
Natural resources: 
  coal, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  24% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  21% 
other: 
  34% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  Meuse River, a major source of drinking water, polluted from steel
  production wastes; other rivers polluted by animal wastes and
  fertilizers; industrial air pollution contributes to acid rain in
  neighboring countries
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands; signed,
  but not ratified - Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  crossroads of Western Europe; majority of West European capitals
  within 1,000 km of Brussels which is the seat of the EC

@Belgium, People

Population: 
  10,062,836 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.2% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.71 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.26 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.96 years 
male: 
  73.67 years 
female: 
  80.44 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.62 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Belgian(s) 
adjective: 
  Belgian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Fleming 55%, Walloon 33%, mixed or other 12% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 75%, Protestant or other 25% 
Languages: 
  Dutch 56%, French 32%, German 1%, legally bilingual 11% divided along
  ethnic lines
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  4.126 million 
by occupation: 
  services 63.6%, industry 28%, construction 6.1%, agriculture 2.3%
  (1988)

@Belgium, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Belgium 
conventional short form: 
  Belgium 
local long form: 
  Royaume de Belgique 
local short form: 
  Belgique 
Digraph: 
  BE
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Brussels 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces (French: provinces, singular - province; Flemish:
  provincien, singular - provincie); Antwerpen, Brabant, Hainaut, Liege,
  Limburg, Luxembourg, Namur, Oost-Vlaanderen, West-Vlaanderen
Independence: 
  4 October 1830 (from the Netherlands)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 21 July (ascension of King Leopold to the throne in
  1831) 
Constitution: 
  7 February 1831, last revised 14 July 1993; parliament approved a
  constitutional package creating a federal state
Legal system: 
  civil law system influenced by English constitutional theory; judicial
  review of legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age, universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King ALBERT II (since NA August 1993) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Jean-Luc DEHAENE (since 6 March 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; the king appoints the ministers who are chosen by the
  legislature
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
   (Flemish - Senaat, French - Senat); elections last held 24 November
  1991 (next to be held by November 1996); results - percent of vote by
  party NA; seats - (184 total; of which 106 are directly elected) CVP
  20, SP 14, PVV (now VLD) 13, VU 5, AGALEV 5, VB 5, ROSSEN 1, PS 18,
  PRL 9, PSC 9, ECOLO 6, FDF 1
Chamber of Representatives: 
   (Flemish - Kamer van Volksvertegenwoordigers, French - Chambre des
  Representants); elections last held 24 November 1991 (next to be held
  by November 1996); results - CVP 16.7%, PS 13.6%, SP 12.0%, PVV (now
  VLD) 11.9%, PRL 8.2%, PSC 7.8%, VB 6.6%, VU 5.9%, ECOLO 5.1%, AGALEV
  4.9%, FDF 2.6%, ROSSEM 3.2%, FN 1.5%; seats - (212 total) CVP 39, PS
  35, SP 28, PVV (now VLD) 26, PRL 20, PSC 18, FB 12, VU 10, ECOLO 10,
  AGALEV 7, FDF 3, ROSSEM 3, FN 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Flemish - Hof van Cassatie, French - Cour de
  Cassation)
Political parties and leaders: 
  Flemish Social Christian (CVP), Johan van HECKE, president;
  Francophone Social Christian (PSC), Melchior WATHELET, president;
  Flemish Socialist (SP), Frank VANDENBROUCKE, president; Francophone
  Socialist (PS), Philippe BUSQUIN; Flemish Liberals and Democrats
  (VLD), Guy VERHOFSTADT, president; Francophone Liberal (PRL), Jean
  GOL, president; Francophone Democratic Front (FDF), Georges CLERFAYT,
  president; Volksunie (VU), Bert ANCIAUX, president; Communist Party
  (PCB), Louis VAN GEYT, president; Vlaams Blok (VB), Karel DILLEN,
  chairman; ROSSEM, Jean Pierre VAN ROSSEM; National Front (FN), Werner
  van STEEN; AGALEV (Flemish Greens), no president; ECOLO (Francophone
  Ecologists), no president; other minor parties
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Christian and Socialist Trade Unions; Federation of Belgian
  Industries; numerous other associations representing bankers,
  manufacturers, middle-class artisans, and the legal and medical
  professions; various organizations represent the cultural interests of
  Flanders and Wallonia; various peace groups such as the Flemish Action
  Committee Against Nuclear Weapons and Pax Christi
Member of: 
  AG (observer), ACCT, AfDB, AsDB, Australian Group, Benelux, BIS, CCC,
  CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECE, EIB, ESA, FAO, G-9, G-10, GATT,
  IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO,
  MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMOGIP, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNRWA, UNTAC, UNTSO,
  UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Juan CASSIERS 
chancery: 
  3330 Garfield Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 333-6900 
FAX: 
  (202) 333-3079 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Alan J. BLINKEN 
embassy: 
  27 Boulevard du Regent, Brussels 
mailing address: 
  B-1000 Brussels, APO AE 09724 
telephone: 
  [32] (2) 513-3830 
FAX: 
  [32] (2) 511-2725 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of black (hoist side), yellow, and red; the
  design was based on the flag of France

@Belgium, Economy

Overview: 
  This small private enterprise economy has capitalized on its central
  geographic location, highly developed transport network, and
  diversified industrial and commercial base. Industry is concentrated
  mainly in the populous Flemish area in the north, although the
  government is encouraging reinvestment in the southern region of
  Walloon. With few natural resources Belgium must import substantial
  quantities of raw materials and export a large volume of manufactures,
  making its economy unusually dependent on the state of world markets.
  Three fourths of its trade is with other EC countries. The economy
  grew at a strong 4% pace during the period 1988-90, but economic
  growth slowed to a 1% pace in 1991-92 and dropped by 1.5% in 1993.
  Belgium's public debt has risen to 140% of GDP, and the government is
  trying to control its expenditures to bring the figure more into line
  with other industrialized countries.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $177.5 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1.5% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $17,700 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.8% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  13.5% (March 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $97.8 billion 
enditures: 
     $109.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1989)
Exports: 
  7 billion (f.o.b., 1992) Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union
commodities: 
  iron and steel, transportation equipment, tractors, diamonds,
  petroleum products
partners: 
  EC 75.5%, US 3.7%, former Communist countries 1.4% (1991)
Imports: 
  $120 billion (c.i.f., 1992) Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union
commodities: 
  fuels, grains, chemicals, foodstuffs
partners: 
  EC 73%, US 4.8%, oil-exporting less developed countries 4%, former
  Communist countries 1.8% (1991)
External debt: 
  $31.3 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -0.1% (1993 est.); accounts for 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  17,500,000 kW
production: 
  68 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,790 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  engineering and metal products, motor vehicle assembly, processed food
  and beverages, chemicals, basic metals, textiles, glass, petroleum,
  coal
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 2.0% of GDP; emphasis on livestock production - beef,
  veal, pork, milk; major crops are sugar beets, fresh vegetables,
  fruits, grain, tobacco; net importer of farm products
Illicit drugs: 
  source of precursor chemicals for South American cocaine processors;
  important gateway country for cocaine entering the European market
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $5.8 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Belgian franc (BF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Belgian francs (BF) per US$1 - 36.242 (January 1994), 34.597 (1993),
  32.150 (1992), 34.148 (1991), 33.418 (1990), 39.404 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Belgium, Communications

Railroads: 
  Belgian National Railways (SNCB) operates 3,568 km 1.435-meter
  standard gauge, government owned; 2,563 km double track; 2,207 km
  electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  137,876 km 
paved: 
  129,603 km (including 1,631 km of limited access divided highway)
unpaved: 
  8,273 km (1989)
Inland waterways: 
  2,043 km (1,528 km in regular commercial use)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 161 km; petroleum products 1,167 km; natural gas 3,300 km 
Ports: 
  Antwerp, Brugge, Gent, Oostende, Zeebrugge
Merchant marine: 
  21 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 36,200 GRT/52,039 DWT, bulk 1,
  cargo 9, chemical tanker 5, liquefied gas 1, oil tanker 5 
Airports: 
total: 
  42 
usable: 
  42 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  24 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  15 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed, technologically advanced, and completely automated
  domestic and international telephone and telegraph facilities;
  extensive cable network; limited microwave radio relay network;
  4,720,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 3 AM, 39 FM, 32 TV; 5
  submarine cables; 2 satellite earth stations - Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  and EUTELSAT systems; nationwide mobile phone system

@Belgium, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,558,109; fit for military service 2,130,172; reach
  military age (19) annually 61,710 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $3.8 billion, 1.8% of GDP (1993)


@Belize, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea between Guatemala and
  Mexico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  22,960 sq km 
land area: 
  22,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Massachusetts
Land boundaries: 
  total 516 km, Guatemala 266 km, Mexico 250 km 
Coastline: 
  386 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm in the north, 3 nm in the south
note: 
  from the mouth of the Sarstoon River to Ranguana Cay, Belize's
  territorial sea is 3 miles; according to Belize's Maritime Areas Act,
  1992, the purpose of this limitation is to provide a framework for
  the negotiation of a definitive agreement on territorial differences
  with Guatemala
International disputes: 
  maritime border with Guatemala in dispute; desultory negotiations to
  resolve the dispute have begun
Climate: 
  tropical; very hot and humid; rainy season (May to February)
Terrain: 
  flat, swampy coastal plain; low mountains in south
Natural resources: 
  arable land potential, timber, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  2% 
forest and woodland: 
  44% 
other: 
  52% 
Irrigated land: 
  20 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; water pollution from sewage, industrial effluents,
  agricultural runoff
natural hazards: 
  frequent devastating hurricanes (September to December) and coastal
  flooding (especially in south)
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Climate Change
Note: 
  national capital moved 80 km inland from Belize City to Belmopan
  because of hurricanes; only country in Central America without a
  coastline on the North Pacific Ocean

@Belize, People

Population: 
  208,949 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.42% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  34.74 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -4.56 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  35.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.08 years 
male: 
  66.14 years 
female: 
  70.12 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.39 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Belizean(s) 
adjective: 
  Belizean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo 44%, Creole 30%, Maya 11%, Garifuna 7%, other 8% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 62%, Protestant 30% (Anglican 12%, Methodist 6%,
  Mennonite 4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 3%, Pentecostal 2%, Jehovah's
  Witnesses 1%, other 2%), none 2%, other 6% (1980)
Languages: 
  English (official), Spanish, Maya, Garifuna (Carib)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  91% 
male: 
  91% 
female: 
  91% 
Labor force: 
  51,500 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 30%, services 16%, government 15.4%, commerce 11.2%,
  manufacturing 10.3%
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor and all types of technical personnel (1985)

@Belize, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Belize 
former: 
  British Honduras 
Digraph: 
  BH
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Belmopan 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 districts; Belize, Cayo, Corozal, Orange Walk, Stann Creek, Toledo
Independence: 
  21 September 1981 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 21 September (1981) 
Constitution: 
  21 September 1981
Legal system: 
  English law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Sir Colville YOUNG (since 17 November 1993) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Manuel ESQUIVEL (since July 1993); Deputy Prime
  Minister Dean BARROW (since NA 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on advice from the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly
Senate: 
  consists of an 8-member body, 5 are appointed on the advice of the
  prime minister, 2 on the advice of the leader of the opposition, and 1
  after consultation with the Belize Advisory Council
National Assembly: 
  elections last held 30 June 1993 (next to be held June 1998); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (28 total) PUP 13 UDP 15
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's United Party (PUP), George PRICE, Florencio MARIN, Said MUSA;
  United Democratic Party (UDP), Manuel ESQUIVEL, Dean LINDO, Dean
  BARROW; National Alliance for Belizean Rights, Philip GOLDSON
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Society for the Promotion of Education and Research (SPEAR), Assad
  SHOMAN; United Workers Front, leader NA
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dean LINDO 
chancery: 
  2535 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-9636 
FAX: 
  (202) 332-6888 
consulate(s) general: 
  Miami 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Eugene L. SCASSA 
embassy: 
  Gabourel Lane and Hutson Street, Belize City 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 286, Belize City 
telephone: 
  [501] (2) 77161 through 77163 
FAX: 
  [501] (2) 30802 
Flag: 
  blue with a narrow red stripe along the top and the bottom edges;
  centered is a large white disk bearing the coat of arms; the coat of
  arms features a shield flanked by two workers in front of a mahogany
  tree with the related motto SUB UMBRA FLOREO (I Flourish in the Shade)
  on a scroll at the bottom, all encircled by a green garland

@Belize, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based primarily on agriculture, agro-based industry,
  and merchandising, with tourism and construction assuming increasing
  importance. Agriculture accounts for about 30% of GDP and provides 75%
  of export earnings, while sugar, the chief crop, accounts for almost
  40% of hard currency earnings. The US, Belize's main trading partner,
  is assisting in efforts to reduce dependency on sugar with an
  agricultural diversification program.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $550 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5.3% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $2,700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5.5% (1991)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $126.8 million 
expenditures: 
  $123.1 million, including capital expenditures of $44.8 million (FY91
  est.)
Exports: 
  $116 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  sugar, citrus, clothing, fish products, bananas, molasses, wood
partners: 
  US 51%, UK, other EC (1992)
Imports: 
  $273 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment, food, manufactured goods,
  fuels, chemicals, pharmaceuticals
partners: 
  US 57%, UK 8%, other EC 7%, Mexico (1992)
External debt: 
  $143.7 million (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.7% (1990); accounts for 12% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  34,532 kW
production: 
  90 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  393 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  garment production, citrus concentrates, sugar refining, rum,
  beverages, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 30% of GDP (including fish and forestry); commercial
  crops include sugar cane, bananas, coca, citrus fruits; expanding
  output of lumber and cultured shrimp; net importer of basic foods
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine; an illicit producer of cannabis for
  the international drug trade; eradication program cut marijuana
  production from 200 metric tons in 1987 to about 50 metric tons in
  1991
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $104 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $215
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Belizean dollar (Bz$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Belizean dollars (Bz$) per US$1 - 2.00 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Belize, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,710 km 
paved: 
  500 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,600 km; improved earth 300 km; unimproved earth 310 km 
Inland waterways: 
  825 km river network used by shallow-draft craft; seasonally navigable
Ports: 
  Belize City; additional ports for shallow draught craft include
  Corozol, Punta Gorda, Big Creek
Merchant marine: 
  25 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 53,509 GRT/80,345 DWT, bulk 6,
  cargo 11, container 2, oil tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 3 
Airports: 
total: 
  47 
usable: 
  38 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,229-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  8,650 telephones; above-average system based on microwave radio relay;
  broadcast stations - 6 AM, 5 FM, 1 TV, 1 shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Belize, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  British Forces Belize withdrawn by the end of 1993 except for a small
  training detachment, Belize Defense Force (including Army, Navy, Air
  Force, and Volunteer Guard), Belize National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 48,789; fit for military service 29,040; reach
  military age (18) annually 2,175 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $4.8 million, 1.8% of GDP (1992)


@Benin, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Nigeria and
  Togo
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  112,620 sq km 
land area: 
  110,620 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Pennsylvania
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,989 km, Burkina 306 km, Niger 266 km, Nigeria 773 km, Togo 644
  km 
Coastline: 
  121 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to undulating plain; some hills and low mountains
Natural resources: 
  small offshore oil deposits, limestone, marble, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  35% 
other: 
  45% 
Irrigated land: 
  60 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  limited supply of safe drinking water; illegal hunting threatens
  wildlife populations; deforestation; desertification
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dusty harmattan wind may affect north in winter
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  recent droughts have severely affected marginal agriculture in north;
  no natural harbors

@Benin, People

Population: 
  5,341,710 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.33% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  47.67 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  14.36 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  110.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  51.77 years 
male: 
  49.92 years 
female: 
  53.68 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.79 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Beninese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Beninese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 99% (42 ethnic groups, most important being Fon, Adja, Yoruba,
  Bariba), Europeans 5,500
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 70%, Muslim 15%, Christian 15% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Fon and Yoruba (most common vernaculars in south),
  tribal languages (at least six major ones in north)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  23% 
male: 
  32% 
female: 
  16% 
Labor force: 
  1.9 million (1987)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 60%, transport, commerce, and public services 38%,
  industry less than 2%
note: 
  49% of population of working age (1985)

@Benin, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Benin 
conventional short form: 
  Benin 
local long form: 
  Republique Populaire du Benin 
local short form: 
  Benin 
former: 
  Dahomey 
Digraph: 
  BN
Type: 
  republic under multiparty democratic rule dropped Marxism-Leninism
  December 1989; democratic reforms adopted February 1990; transition to
  multiparty system completed 4 April 1991
Capital: 
  Porto-Novo 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 provinces; Atakora, Atlantique, Borgou, Mono, Oueme, Zou
Independence: 
  1 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 1 August (1990) 
Constitution: 
  2 December 1990
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law and customary law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Nicephore SOGLO (since 4 April 1991); election last held 10
  and 24 March 1991; results - Nicephore SOGLO 68%, Mathieu KEREKOU 32%
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 10 and 24 March 1991; results - percent of vote by
  party NA; seats - (64 total) UDFP-MDPS-ULD 12, PNDD/PRD 9, PSD/UNSP 8,
  NCC 7, RND 7, MNDD/MSUP/UDRN 6, UDS 5, RDL 4, ASD/BSD 3, ADP/UDRS 2,
  UNDP 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Alliance of the Democratic Union for the Forces of Progress (UDFP),
  Timothee ADANLIN; Movement for Democracy and Social Progress (MDPS),
  Jean-Roger AHOYO; Union for Liberty and Development (ULD), Marcellin
  DEGBE; Alliance of the National Party for Democracy and Development
  (PNDD) and the Democratic Renewal Party (PRD), Pascal Chabi KAO;
  Alliance of the Social Democratic Party (PSD) and the National Union
  for Solidarity and Progress (UNSP), Bruno AMOUSSOU; Our Common Cause
  (NCC), Albert TEVOEDJRE; National Rally for Democracy (RND), Joseph
  KEKE; Alliance of the National Movement for Democracy and Development
  (MNDD), leader NA; Movement for Solidarity, Union, and Progress
  (MSUP), Adebo ADENIYI; Union for Democracy and National Reconstruction
  (UDRN), Azaria FAKOREDE; Union for Democracy and National Solidarity
  (UDS), Mama Amadou N'DIAYE; Assembly of Liberal Democrats for National
  Reconstruction (RDL), Severin ADJOVI; Alliance of the Alliance for
  Social Democracy (ASD), Robert DOSSOU; Bloc for Social Democracy
  (BSD), Michel MAGNIDE; Alliance of the Alliance for Democracy and
  Progress (ADP), Akindes ADEKPEDJOU; Democratic Union for Social
  Renewal (UDRS), Bio Gado Seko N'GOYE; National Union for Democracy and
  Progress (UNDP), Robert TAGNON; Party for Progress and Democracy,
  Thiophile NATA; African Rally for Progress and Solidarity (RAPS),
  Florentin MITO-BABA; The Benin Renaissance Party , Desire VIEYRA and
  Rosine SOGLO; The Patriotic Union for the Republic (UPR), Jean-Marie
  ZAHOUN; Union for the Conservation of Democracy, Bernard HOUEGNON
note: 
  as of May 1994, Benin had about 60 political parties
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Candide AHOUANSOU 
chancery: 
  2737 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 232-6656  
FAX: 
  (202) 265-1996 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ruth A. DAVIS 
embassy: 
  Rue Caporal Anani Bernard, Cotonou 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 2012, Cotonou 
telephone: 
  [229] 30-06-50, 30-05-13, 30-17-92 
FAX: 
  [229] 30-14-39 and 30-19-74 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and red with a vertical
  green band on the hoist side

@Benin, Economy

Overview: 
  Benin is one of the least developed countries in the world because of
  limited natural resources and a poorly developed infrastructure.
  Agriculture accounts for about 35% of GDP, employs about 60% of the
  labor force, and generates a major share of foreign exchange earnings.
  The industrial sector contributes only about 10% to GDP and employs 2%
  of the work force. Low prices in recent years have kept down hard
  currency earnings from Benin's major exports of agricultural products,
  primarily cotton. A World Bank supported structural adjustment program
  begun in 1989 has helped strengthen the economy through such measures
  as trimming the government payroll, reforming the tax system, and
  encouraging private investment, both domestic and foreign. Benin has
  experienced 3 consecutive years of moderate growth as a result.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $1,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.4% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $218 million 
expenditures: 
  $355 million, including capital expenditures of $100 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $328.8 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil, cotton, palm products, cocoa
partners: 
  FRG 36%, France 16%, Spain 14%, Italy 8%, UK 4%
Imports: 
  $482.3 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, beverages, tobacco, petroleum products, intermediate
  goods, capital goods, light consumer goods
partners: 
  France 20%, Thailand 8%, Netherlands 7%, US 5%
External debt: 
  $1 billion (December 1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -0.7% (1988); accounts for 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  30,000 kW
production: 
  25 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  textiles, cigarettes, construction materials, beverages, food
  production, petroleum
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 35% of GDP; small farms produce 90% of agricultural
  output; production is dominated by food crops - corn, sorghum,
  cassava, beans, rice; cash crops include cotton, palm oil, peanuts;
  poultry and livestock output has not kept up with consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $46 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.3
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $19 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $101 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994 the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Benin, Communications

Railroads: 
  578 km, all 1.000-meter gauge, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  8,435 km 
paved: 
  1,038 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone 2,600 km; improved earth 1,530 km; unimproved earth
  3,267 km 
Inland waterways: 
  navigable along small sections, important only locally
Ports: 
  Cotonou
Airports: 
total: 
  7 
usable: 
  6 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system of open wire, submarine cable, and radio relay microwave;
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, 2 FM, 2 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@Benin, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Armed Forces (including Army, Navy, Air Force), National Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,209,226; females age 15-49 1,120,105; males fit for
  military service 611,257; females fit for military service 573,775;
  males reach military age (18) annually 58,293 (1994 est.);
  femalesreach military age (18) annually 56,735 (1994 est.); both sexes
  are liable for miltary service
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $29 million, 1.7% of GDP (1988 est.)


@Bermuda

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Bermuda, Geography

Location: 
  Northern North America, in the western North Atlantic Ocean, 1,050 km
  east of North Carolina
Map references: 
  North America 
Area: 
total area: 
  50 sq km 
land area: 
  50 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  103 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical; mild, humid; gales, strong winds common in winter
Terrain: 
  low hills separated by fertile depressions
Natural resources: 
  limestone, pleasant climate fostering tourism 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  20% 
other: 
  80% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes (June to November)
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  some reclaimed land leased by US Government; consists of about 360
  small coral islands with ample rainfall, but no rivers or freshwater
  lakes

@Bermuda, People

Population: 
  61,158 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.77% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.14 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.3 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  13.16 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.03 years 
male: 
  73.36 years 
female: 
  76.97 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.81 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bermudian(s) 
adjective: 
  Bermudian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 61%, white and other 39% 
Religions: 
  Anglican 37%, Roman Catholic 14%, African Methodist Episcopal (Zion)
  10%, Methodist 6%, Seventh-Day Adventist 5%, other 28% 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  32,000 
by occupation: 
  clerical 25%, services 22%, laborers 21%, professional and technical
  13%, administrative and managerial 10%, sales 7%, agriculture and
  fishing 2% (1984)

@Bermuda, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Bermuda 
Digraph: 
  BD
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Hamilton 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 parishes and 2 municipalities*; Devonshire, Hamilton, Hamilton*,
  Paget, Pembroke, Saint George*, Saint Georges, Sandys, Smiths,
  Southampton, Warwick
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Bermuda Day, 22 May 
Constitution: 
  8 June 1968
Legal system: 
  English law
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  Lord David WADDINGTON (since 25 August 1992) 
head of government: 
  Premier John William David SWAN (since NA January 1982); Deputy
  Premier J. Irving PEARMAN (since 5 October 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; nominated by the premier, appointed by the governor
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  consists of an 11-member body appointed by the governor
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 5 October 1993 (next to be held by NA October
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (40 total) UBP
  22, PLP 18
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  United Bermuda Party (UBP), John W. D. SWAN; Progressive Labor Party
  (PLP), Frederick WADE; National Liberal Party (NLP), Gilbert DARRELL
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Bermuda Industrial Union (BIU), Ottiwell SIMMONS
Member of: 
  CARICOM (observer), CCC, ICFTU, INTERPOL (subbureau), IOC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
consulate general: 
  Crown Hill, 16 Middle Road, Devonshire, Hamilton 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box HM325, Hamilton HMBX; PSC 1002, FPO AE 09727-1002 
telephone: 
  (809) 295-1342 
FAX: 
  (809) 295-1592 
Flag: 
  red with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Bermudian coat of arms (white and blue shield with a red lion holding
  a scrolled shield showing the sinking of the ship Sea Venture off
  Bermuda in 1609) centered on the outer half of the flag

@Bermuda, Economy

Overview: 
  Bermuda enjoys one of the highest per capita incomes in the world,
  having successfully exploited its location by providing luxury tourist
  facilities and financial services. The tourist industry attracts more
  than 90% of its business from North America. The industrial sector is
  small, and agriculture is severely limited by a lack of suitable land.
  About 80% of food needs are imported.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $1.63 billion (1992)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1.5% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $27,100 (1992)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.4% (1991)
Unemployment rate: 
  6% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $327.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $308.9 million, including capital expenditures of $35.4 million (FY91
  est.)
Exports: 
  $60 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  semitropical produce, light manufactures, re-exports of
  pharmaceuticals
partners: 
  US 55%, UK 32%, Canada 11%, other 2%
Imports: 
  $468 million (f.o.b.,1991)
commodities: 
  fuel, foodstuffs, machinery
partners: 
  US 60%, UK 8%, Venezuela 7%, Canada 5%, Japan 5%, other 15%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  154,000 kW
production: 
  504 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,370 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, finance, structural concrete products, paints,
  pharmaceuticals, ship repairing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for less than 1% of GDP; most basic foods must be imported;
  produces bananas, vegetables, citrus fruits, flowers, dairy products
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-81), $34 million;  Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),  $277
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Bermudian dollar (Bd$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Bermudian dollar (Bd$) per US$1 - 1.0000 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Bermuda, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  210 km 
paved: 
  210 km 
note: 
  in addition, there are 400 km of paved and unpaved roads that are
  privately owned
Ports: 
  Freeport, Hamilton, Saint George
Merchant marine: 
  67 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,407,518 GRT/5,775,281 DWT,
  bulk 15, cargo 4, container 3, liquefied gas 14, oil tanker 20,
  refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 7 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  modern, fully automatic telephone system; 52,670 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 5 AM, 3 FM, 2 TV; 3 submarine cables; 2 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth stations

@Bermuda, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Bermuda Regiment, Bermuda Police Force, Bermuda Reserve Constabulary 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Bhutan, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, in the Himalayas, between China and India
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  47,000 sq km 
land area: 
  47,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than half the size of Indiana
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,075 km, China 470 km, India 605 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  varies; tropical in southern plains; cool winters and hot summers in
  central valleys; severe winters and cool summers in Himalayas
Terrain: 
  mostly mountainous with some fertile valleys and savanna
Natural resources: 
  timber, hydropower, gypsum, calcium carbide 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  70% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  340 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion; limited access to safe drinking water
natural hazards: 
  violent storms coming down from the Himalayas are the source of the
  country's name which translates as Land of the Thunder Dragon
international agreements: 
  party to - Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; strategic location between China and India; controls
  several key Himalayan mountain passes

@Bhutan, People

Population: 
  716,380 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  other estimates range as high as 1.7 million (July 1994 est.)
Population growth rate: 
  2.34% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  39.31 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  15.93 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  121 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  50.6 years 
male: 
  51.15 years 
female: 
  50.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.42 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bhutanese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Bhutanese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Bhote 50%, ethnic Nepalese 35%, indigenous or migrant tribes 15% 
Religions: 
  Lamaistic Buddhism 75%, Indian- and Nepalese-influenced Hinduism 25% 
Languages: 
  Dzongkha (official), Bhotes speak various Tibetan dialects; Nepalese
  speak various Nepalese dialects
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  agriculture 93%, services 5%, industry and commerce 2%
note: 
  massive lack of skilled labor

@Bhutan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Bhutan 
conventional short form: 
  Bhutan 
Digraph: 
  BT
Type: 
  monarchy; special treaty relationship with India
Capital: 
  Thimphu 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 districts (dzongkhag, singular and plural); Bumthang, Chhukha,
  Chirang, Daga, Geylegphug, Ha, Lhuntshi, Mongar, Paro, Pemagatsel,
  Punakha, Samchi, Samdrup Jongkhar, Shemgang, Tashigang, Thimphu,
  Tongsa, Wangdi Phodrang
Independence: 
  8 August 1949 (from India)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 17 December (1907) (Ugyen Wangchuck became first
  hereditary king) 
Constitution: 
  no written constitution or bill of rights
Legal system: 
  based on Indian law and English common law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  each family has one vote in village-level elections
Executive branch: 
Chief of State and Head of Government: 
  King Jigme Singye WANGCHUCK (since 24 July 1972) 
Royal Advisory Council (Lodoi Tsokde): 
  nominated by the king
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers (Lhengye Shungtsog); appointed by the king
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral National Assembly (Tshogdu); no national elections
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  no legal parties
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Buddhist clergy; Indian merchant community; ethnic Nepalese
  organizations leading militant antigovernment campaign
Member of: 
  AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC,
  ITU, NAM, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  no formal diplomatic relations; the Bhutanese mission to the UN in New
  York has consular jurisdiction in the US
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no formal diplomatic relations, although informal contact is
  maintained between the Bhutanese and US Embassies in New Delhi (India)
Flag: 
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side corner; the upper
  triangle is orange and the lower triangle is red; centered along the
  dividing line is a large black and white dragon facing away from the
  hoist side

@Bhutan, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy, one of the world's least developed, is based on
  agriculture and forestry, which provide the main livelihood for 90% of
  the population and account for about 50% of GDP. Rugged mountains
  dominate the terrain and make the building of roads and other
  infrastructure difficult and expensive. The economy is closely aligned
  with that of India through strong trade and monetary links. The
  industrial sector is small and technologically backward, with most
  production of the cottage industry type. Most development projects,
  such as road construction, rely on Indian migrant labor. Bhutan's
  hydropower potential and its attraction for tourists are its most
  important natural resources; however, the government limits the number
  of tourists to 4,000 per year to minimize foreign influence. Much of
  the impetus for growth has come from large public-sector companies.
  Nevertheless, in recent years, Bhutan has shifted toward decentralized
  development planning and greater private initiative. The government
  privatized several large public-sector firms, is revamping its trade
  regime and liberalizing administerial procedures over industrial
  licensing. The government's industrial contribution to GDP decreased
  from 13% in 1988 to about 10% in 1992.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $500 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (FY93 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11% (October 1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $100 million 
expenditures: 
  $112 million, including capital expenditures of $60 million (FY92
  est.)
note: 
  the government of India finances nearly one-quarter of Bhutan's budget
  expenditures
Exports: 
  $66 million (f.o.b., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  cardamon, gypsum, timber, handicrafts, cement, fruit, electricity (to
  India), precious stones, spices
partners: 
  India 82%, Bangladesh, Singapore
Imports: 
  $125 million (c.i.f., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery and parts, vehicles, fabrics
partners: 
  India 60%, Japan, Germany, US, UK
External debt: 
  $141 million (June 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for 8% of GDP; primarily cottage industry
  and home based handicrafts
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  336,000 kW
production: 
  1.5422 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,203 kWh (25.8% is exported to India leaving 1,633 kWh per capita;
  1990-91)
Industries: 
  cement, wood products, processed fruits, alcoholic beverages, calcium
  carbide
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 45% of GDP; based on subsistence farming and animal
  husbandry; self-sufficient in food except for foodgrains; other
  production - rice, corn, root crops, citrus fruit, dairy products,
  eggs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $115 million;  OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $11 million 
Currency: 
  1 ngultrum (Nu) = 100 chetrum; note - Indian currency is also legal
  tender
Exchange rates: 
  ngultrum (Nu) per US$1 - 31.370 (January 1994), 30.493 (1993), 25.918
  (1992), 22.742 (1991), 17.504 (1990), 16.226 (1989); note - the
  Bhutanese ngultrum is at par with the Indian rupee
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Bhutan, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,165 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,703 km 
undifferentiated: 
  462 km 
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic telephone service is very poor with very few telephones in
  use; international telephone and telegraph service is by land line
  through India; a satellite earth station was planned (1990); broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, no TV (1990)

@Bhutan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Bhutan Army, Palace Guard, Militia 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 424,558; fit for military service 226,851; reach
  military age (18) annually 17,310 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Bolivia, Geography

Location: 
  Central South America, between Brazil and Chile
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,098,580 sq km 
land area: 
  1,084,390 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three times the size of Montana
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,743 km, Argentina 832 km, Brazil 3,400 km, Chile 861 km,
  Paraguay 750 km, Peru 900 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  has wanted a sovereign corridor to the South Pacific Ocean since the
  Atacama area was lost to Chile in 1884; dispute with Chile over Rio
  Lauca water rights
Climate: 
  varies with altitude; humid and tropical to cold and semiarid
Terrain: 
  rugged Andes Mountains with a highland plateau (Altiplano), hills,
  lowland plains of the Amazon Basin
Natural resources: 
  tin, natural gas, petroleum, zinc, tungsten, antimony, silver, iron
  ore, lead, gold, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  25% 
forest and woodland: 
  52% 
other: 
  20% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,650 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation contributing to loss of biodiversity; overgrazing; soil
  erosion; desertification; industrial pollution of water supplies used
  for drinking and irrigation
natural hazards: 
  flooding in the northeast (March to April)
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands; signed, but
  not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Tropical Timber
Note: 
  landlocked; shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's highest navigable
  lake (elevation 3,805 m), with Peru; cold, thin air of high plateau is
  obstacle to efficient fuel combustion, as well as to physical activity
  by those unaccustomed to it from birth

@Bolivia, People

Population: 
  7,719,445 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.28% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.22 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.37 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  73.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  63.31 years 
male: 
  60.86 years 
female: 
  65.88 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.21 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bolivian(s) 
adjective: 
  Bolivian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Quechua 30%, Aymara 25%, mestizo (mixed European and Indian ancestry)
  25%-30%, European 5%-15%
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95%, Protestant (Evangelical Methodist)
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), Quechua (official), Aymara (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  78% 
male: 
  85% 
female: 
  71% 
Labor force: 
  3.54 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture NA, services and utilities 20%, manufacturing, mining and
  construction 7% (1993)

@Bolivia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Bolivia 
conventional short form: 
  Bolivia 
local long form: 
  Republica de Bolivia 
local short form: 
  Bolivia 
Digraph: 
  BL
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  La Paz (seat of government);  Sucre (legal capital and seat of
  judiciary)
Administrative divisions: 
  9 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Chuquisaca,
  Cochabamba, Beni, La Paz, Oruro, Pando, Potosi, Santa Cruz, Tarija
Independence: 
  6 August 1825 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 6 August (1825) 
Constitution: 
  2 February 1967
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish law and Code Napoleon; has not accepted compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age, universal and compulsory (married);  21 years of age,
  universal and compulsory (single)
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA Bustamente (since 6 August 1993);
  Vice President Victor Hugo CARDENAS Conde (since 6 August 1993);
  election last held 6 June 1993 (next to be held May 1997); results -
  Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA (MNR) 34%, Hugo BANZER Suarez (ADN/MIR
  alliance) 20%, Carlos PALENQUE Aviles (CONDEPA) 14%, Max FERNANDEZ
  Rojas (UCS) 13%, Antonio ARANIBAR Quiroga (MBL) 5%; no candidate
  received a majority of the popular vote; Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA won
  a congressional runoff election on 4 August 1993 after forming a
  coalition with Max FERNANDEZ and Antonio ARANIBAR
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from panel proposed by the Senate
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Congress (Congreso Nacional)
Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados): 
  elections last held 6 June 1993 (next to be held May 1997); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (130 total) MNR 52, UCS 20, ADN
  17, MIR 17, CONDEPA 13, MBL 7, ARBOL 1, ASD 1, EJE 1, PDC 1
Chamber of Senators (Camara de Senadores): 
  elections last held 6 June 1993 (next to be held May 1997); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (27 total) MNR 17, ADN 4, MIR 4,
  CONDEPA 1, UCS 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR), Jaime PAZ Zamora;
  Nationalist Democratic Action (ADN), Jorge LANDIVAR; Nationalist
  Revolutionary Movement (MNR), Gonzalo SANCHEZ DE LOZADA; Civic
  Solidarity Union (UCS), Max FERNANDEZ Rojas; Conscience of the
  Fatherland (CONDEPA), Carlos PALENQUE Aviles; Free Bolivia Movement
  (MBL), Antonio ARANIBAR; Tupac Katari Revolutionary Liberation
  Movement (MRTK-L), Victor Hugo CARDENAS Conde; Christian Democrat
  Party (PDC), Jorge AGREDA
Member of: 
  AG, ECLAC, FAO, GATT, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
  LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Andres PETRICEVIC   
chancery: 
  3014 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-4410 through 4412 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-3712 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Charles R. BOWERS 
embassy: 
  Banco Popular del Peru Building, corner of Calle Mercado and Calle
  Colon, La Paz 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 425, La Paz, or APO AA 34032 
telephone: 
  [591] (2) 350251 or 350120 
FAX: 
  [591] (2) 359875 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), yellow, and green with the
  coat of arms centered on the yellow band; similar to the flag of
  Ghana, which has a large black five-pointed star centered in the
  yellow band

@Bolivia, Economy

Overview: 
  With its long history of semifeudal social controls, dependence on
  volatile prices for its mineral exports, and bouts of hyperinflation,
  Bolivia has remained one of the poorest and least developed Latin
  American countries. However, Bolivia has experienced generally
  improving economic conditions since the PAZ Estenssoro administration
  (1985-89) introduced market-oriented policies which reduced inflation
  from 11,700% in 1985 to about 20% in 1988. PAZ Estenssoro was followed
  as President by Jaime PAZ Zamora (1989-93) who continued the
  free-market policies of his predecessor, despite opposition from his
  own party and from Bolivia's once powerful labor movement. By
  maintaining fiscal discipline, PAZ Zamora helped reduce inflation to
  9.3% in 1993, while GDP grew by an annual average of 3.25% during his
  tenure. Inaugurated in August 1993, President SANCHEZ DE LOZADA has
  vowed to advance government market-oriented economic reforms he helped
  launch as PAZ Estenssoro's Planning Minister. A major privatization
  bill was passed by the Bolivian legislature in late March 1994.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $15.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.2% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $2,100 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.3% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.8% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $3.19 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3.19 billion, including capital expenditures of $552.4 million (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $752 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  metals 35%, natural gas 26%, other 39% (coffee, soybeans, sugar,
  cotton, timber)
partners: 
  US 16% , Argentina (1992 est.)
Imports: 
  $1.17 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  food, petroleum, consumer goods, capital goods
partners: 
  US 23.3% (1992)
External debt: 
  $3.8 billion (January 1994)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7% (1992); accounts for almost 30% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  865,000 kW
production: 
  1.834 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  250 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  mining, smelting, petroleum, food and beverage, tobacco, handicrafts,
  clothing; illicit drug industry reportedly produces 15% of its
  revenues
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 21% of GDP (including forestry and fisheries);
  principal commodities - coffee, coca, cotton, corn, sugarcane, rice,
  potatoes, timber; self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  world's second-largest producer of coca (after Peru) with an estimated
  45,500 hectares under cultivation in 1992; voluntary and forced
  eradication program unable to prevent production from rising to 80,300
  metric tons in 1992 from 78,200 tons in 1989; government considers all
  but 12,000 hectares illicit; intermediate coca products and cocaine
  exported to or through Colombia and Brazil to the US and other
  international drug markets
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $990 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $2.025 billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $340 million 
Currency: 
  1 boliviano ($B) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  bolivianos ($B) per US$1 - 4.5 (March 1994), 4.4604 (November 1993),
  3.9005 (1992), 3.5806 (1991), 3.1727 (1990), 2.6917 (1989), 2.3502
  (1988)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Bolivia, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,684 km total, all narrow gauge; 3,652 km 1.000-meter gauge and 32 km
  0.760-meter gauge, all government owned, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  42,815 km 
paved: 
  1,865 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 12,000 km; improved/unimproved earth 28,950 km 
Inland waterways: 
  10,000 km of commercially navigable waterways
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,800 km; petroleum products 580 km; natural gas 1,495 km 
Ports: 
  none; maritime outlets are Arica and Antofagasta in Chile, Matarani
  and Ilo in Peru
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,214 GRT/6,390 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  1,395 
usable: 
  1,188 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  165 
Telecommunications: 
  very poor telephone service for the general population; 144,300
  telephones - 18.7 telephones per 1,000 persons; microwave radio relay
  system being expanded; improved international services; broadcast
  stations - 129 AM, no FM, 43 TV, 68 shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Bolivia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (Ejercito Boliviano), Navy includes Marines (La Fuerza Naval
  Boliviana), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea Boliviana), National Police Force
  ( Policia Nacional de Bolivia)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,835,661; fit for military service 1,194,077; reach
  military age (19) annually 79,580 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $130.48 million; NA% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Bosnia and Herzegovina

Header
Note: 
  Bosnia and Herzegovina is suffering from interethnic civil strife
  which began in March 1992 after the Government of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina held a referendum on independence. Bosnia's Serbs -
  supported by neighboring Serbia - responded with armed resistance
  aimed at partitioning the republic along ethnic lines and joining
  Serb-held areas to a "greater Serbia." Since the onset of the
  conflict, which has driven approximately half of the pre-war
  population of 4.4 million from their homes, both the Bosnian Serbs and
  the Bosnian Croats have asserted control of more than three-quarters
  of the territory formerly under the control of the Government of
  Bosnia and Herzegovina. The UN and the EU are continuing to try to
  mediate a plan for peace. In March 1994 Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian
  Croats signed an agreement in Washington, DC, creating a Federation of
  Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is to include territories in which
  Muslims or Croats predominated, according to the 1991 census. Bosnian
  Serbs refused to become a part of this Federation.

@Bosnia and Herzegovina, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, on the Balkan Peninsula, between
  Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro
Map references: 
  Africa, Arctic Region, Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  51,233 sq km 
land area: 
  51,233 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Tennessee
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,459 km, Croatia 932 km, Serbia and Montenegro 527 km (312 km
  with Serbia; 215 km with Montenegro)
Coastline: 
  20 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth
exclusive economic zone: 
  12 nm
exclusive fishing zone: 
  12 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  as of May 1994, members of the Bosnian Serb armed factions, desirous
  of establishing a separate state linked with neighboring Serbia,
  occupied 70% of Bosnia after having killed or driven out non-Serb
  inhabitants; the Bosnian Croats, occupied and declared an independent
  state in an additional 10% of Bosnia in 1993, but in March 1994, this
  faction and the Bosnian Government settled their dispute and entered
  into a bicommunal Federation; a Bosnian Government army commander who
  opposes the leadership of Bosnian President IZETBEGOVIC is leading an
  insurrection in the government-held enclave of Bihac
Climate: 
  hot summers and cold winters; areas of high elevation have short, cool
  summers and long, severe winters; mild, rainy winters along coast
Terrain: 
  mountains and valleys
Natural resources: 
  coal, iron, bauxite, manganese, timber, wood products, copper,
  chromium, lead, zinc 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  25% 
forest and woodland: 
  36% 
other: 
  17% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from metallurgical plants; water scarce; sites for
  disposing of urban waste are limited; widespread casualties and
  destruction of infrastructure because of civil strife
natural hazards: 
  subject to frequent and destructive earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer
  Protection

@Bosnia and Herzegovina, People

Population: 
  4,651,485 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  all data dealing with population is subject to considerable error
  because of the dislocations caused by military action and ethnic
  cleansing
Population growth rate: 
  0.69% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.33 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.39 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.13 years 
male: 
  72.43 years 
female: 
  78.02 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.61 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bosnian(s), Herzegovinian(s) 
adjective: 
  Bosnian, Herzegovinian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Muslim 44%, Serb 31%, Croat 17%, other 8% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 40%, Orthodox 31%, Catholic 15%, Protestant 4%, other 10% 
Languages: 
  Serbo-Croatian 99% 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1,026,254 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 2%, industry, mining 45% (1991 est.)

@Bosnia and Herzegovina, Government

Note: 
  The US recognizes the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
  Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is a new government being formed
  by the Muslims and Croats. On 31 May 1994 a Croat president, Kresimir
  ZUBAK, and a Muslim vice president, Ejup GANIC, were elected. Haris
  SILAJDZIC, who is prime minister of the Republic, is also the prime
  minister of the Federation.
Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
conventional short form: 
  Bosnia and Herzegovina 
local long form: 
  Republika Bosna i Hercegovina 
local short form: 
  Bosna i Hercegovina 
Digraph: 
  BK
Type: 
  emerging democracy 
Capital: 
  Sarajevo 
Administrative divisions: 
  109 districts (opstinas, singular - opstina) Banovici, Banja Luka,
  Bihac, Bijeljina, Bileca, Bosanska Dubica, Bosanska Gradiska, Bosanska
  Krupa, Bosanski Brod, Bosanski Novi, Bosanski Petrovac, Bosanski
  Samac, Bosansko Grahovo, Bratunac, Brcko, Breza, Bugojno, Busovaca,
  Cazin, Cajnice, Capljina, Celinac, Citluk, Derventa, Doboj, Donji
  Vakuf, Foca, Fojnica, Gacko, Glamoc, Gorazde, Gornji Vakuf, Gracanica,
  Gradacac, Grude, Han Pijesak, Jablanica, Jajce, Kakanj, Kalesija,
  Kalinovik, Kiseljak, Kladanj, Kljuc, Konjic, Kotor Varos, Kresevo,
  Kupres, Laktasi, Listica, Livno, Lopare, Lukavac, Ljubinje, Ljubuski,
  Maglaj, Modrica, Mostar, Mrkonjic-Grad, Neum, Nevesinje, Odzak, Olovo,
  Orasje, Posusje, Prijedor, Prnjavor, Prozor, (Pucarevo) Novi Travnik,
  Rogatica, Rudo, Sanski Most, Sarajevo-Centar, Sarajevo-Hadzici,
  Sarajevo-Ilidza, Sarajevo-Ilijas, Sarajevo-Novi Grad, Sarajevo-Novo,
  Sarajevo-Pale, Sarajevo-Stari Grad, Sarajevo-Trnovo, Sarajevo-Vogosca,
  Skender Vakuf, Sokolac, Srbac, Srebrenica, Srebrenik, Stolac,
  Sekovici, Sipovo, Teslic, Tesanj, Drvar, Duvno, Travnik, Trebinje,
  Tuzla, Ugljevik, Vares, Velika Kladusa, Visoko, Visegrad, Vitez,
  Vlasenica, Zavidovici, Zenica, Zvornik, Zepce, Zivinice
note: 
  currently under negotiation with the assistance of international
  mediators
Independence: 
  NA April 1992 (from Yugoslavia)
National holiday: 
  NA
Constitution: 
  promulgated in 1974 (under the Communists), amended 1989, 1990, and
  1991; the Assembly planned to draft a new constitution in 1991, before
  conditions deteriorated; constitution of Federation of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina (including Muslim and Croatian controlled parts of
  Republic) ratified April 1994
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  16 years of age, if employed;  18 years of age, universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Alija IZETBEGOVIC (since 20 December 1990), other members of
  the collective presidency: Ejup GANIC (since NA November 1990), Nijaz
  DURAKOVIC (since NA October 1993), Stjepan KLJUJIC (since NA October
  1993), Ivo KOMSIC (since NA October 1993), Mirko PEJANOVIC (since NA
  June 1992), Tatjana LJUJIC-MIJATOVIC (since NA December 1992)
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Haris SILAJDZIC (since NA October 1993); Deputy Prime
  Minister Edib BUKVIC (since NA October 1993) 
cabinet: 
  executive body of ministers; members of, and responsible to, the
  National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly
Chamber of Municipalities (Vijece Opeina): 
  elections last held November-December 1990 (next to be held NA);
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (110 total) SDA 43, SDS BiH 38,
  HDZ BiH 23, Party of Democratic Changes 4, DSS 1, SPO 1
Chamber of Citizens (Vijece Gradanstvo): 
  elections last held November-December 1990 (next to be held NA);
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (130 total) SDA 43, SDS BiH 34,
  HDZ BiH 21, Party of Democratic Changes 15, SRSJ BiH 12, MBO 2, DSS 1,
  DSZ 1, LS 1
note: 
  legislative elections for Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
  slated for late 1994
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Party of Democratic Action (SDA), Alija IZETBEGOVIC; Croatian
  Democratic Union of Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ BiH), KresimirZUBAK;
  Serbian Democratic Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SDS BiH), Radovan
  KARADZIC, president; Muslim-Bosnian Organization (MBO), Adil
  ZULFIKARPASIC, president; Democratic Party of Socialists (DSS), Nijaz
  DURAKOVIC, president; Party of Democratic Changes, leader NA; Serbian
  Movement for Renewal (SPO), Milan TRIVUNCIC; Alliance of Reform Forces
  of Yugoslavia for Bosnia and Herzegovina (SRSJ BiH), Dr. Nenad
  KECMANOVIC, president; Democratic League of Greens (DSZ), Drazen
  PETROVIC; Liberal Party (LS), Rasim KADIC, president
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  CEI, CSCE, ECE, ICAO, ILO, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user),
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, NAM (guest), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Minister-Counselor, Charge d'Affaires ad interim Seven
  ALKALAJ 
chancery: 
  Suite 760, 1707 L Street NW, Washington, DC 10036 
telephone: 
  (202) 833-3612, 3613, and 3615 
FAX: 
  (202) 833-2061 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Victor JACKOVICH 
embassy: 
  address NA 
mailing address: 
  NA 
telephone: 
  NA 
FAX: 
  NA 
Flag: 
  white with a large blue shield; the shield contains white Roman
  crosses with a white diagonal band running from the upper hoist corner
  to the lower fly side

@Bosnia and Herzegovina, Economy

Overview: 
  Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked next to The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia as the poorest republic in the old Yugoslav federation.
  Although agriculture has been almost all in private hands, farms have
  been small and inefficient, and the republic traditionally has been a
  net importer of food. Industry has been greatly overstaffed, one
  reflection of the rigidities of Communist central planning and
  management. Tito had pushed the development of military industries in
  the republic with the result that Bosnia hosted a large share of
  Yugoslavia's defense plants. As of April 1994, Bosnia and Herzegovina
  was being torn apart by the continued bitter interethnic warfare that
  has caused production to plummet, unemployment and inflation to soar,
  and human misery to multiply. No reliable economic statistics for
  1992-93 are available, although output clearly has fallen
  substantially below the levels of earlier years.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; production is sharply down because of interethnic and
  interrepublic warfare (1991-93)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  NA kW
production: 
  NA kWh
consumption per capita: 
  NA kWh
Industries: 
  steel production, mining (coal, iron ore, lead, zinc, manganese, and
  bauxite), manufacturing (vehicle assembly, textiles, tobacco products,
  wooden furniture, 40% of former Yugoslavia's armaments including tank
  and aircraft assembly, domestic appliances), oil refining (1991)
Agriculture: 
  accounted for 9.0% of GDP in 1989; regularly produces less than 50% of
  food needs; the foothills of northern Bosnia support orchards,
  vineyards, livestock, and some wheat and corn; long winters and heavy
  precipitation leach soil fertility reducing agricultural output in the
  mountains; farms are mostly privately held, small, and not very
  productive (1991)
Illicit drugs: 
  NA
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 dinar = 100 para; Croatian dinar used in Croat-held area, presumably
  to be replaced by new Croatian kuna; old and new Serbian dinars used
  in Serb-held area; hard currencies probably supplanting local
  currencies in areas held by Bosnian government
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Bosnia and Herzegovina, Communications

Railroads: 
  NA km
Highways: 
total: 
  21,168 km 
paved: 
  11,436 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 8,146 km; earth 1,586 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  NA km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 174 km; natural gas 90 km (1992); note - pipelines now
  disrupted
Ports: 
  coastal - none; inland - Bosanski Brod on the Sava River
Airports: 
total: 
  28 
usable: 
  24 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3659: 
  0 
with runways 2440-3659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1220-2439 m: 
  6 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone and telegraph network is in need of modernization and
  expansion, many urban areas being below average compared with services
  in other former Yugoslav republics; 727,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 9 AM, 2 FM, 6 TV; 840,000 radios; 1,012,094 TVs; satellite
  ground stations - none

@Bosnia and Herzegovina, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,298,102; fit for military service 1,054,068; reach
  military age (19) annually 38,283 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Botswana, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, north of South Africa
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  600,370 sq km 
land area: 
  585,370 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,013 km, Namibia 1,360 km, South Africa 1,840 km, Zimbabwe 813
  km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  short section of boundary with Namibia is indefinite; quadripoint with
  Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe is in disagreement; recent dispute with
  Namibia over uninhabited Kasikili (Sidudu) Island in Linyanti (Chobe)
  River
Climate: 
  semiarid; warm winters and hot summers
Terrain: 
  predominately flat to gently rolling tableland; Kalahari Desert in
  southwest
Natural resources: 
  diamonds, copper, nickel, salt, soda ash, potash, coal, iron ore,
  silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  75% 
forest and woodland: 
  2% 
other: 
  21% 
Irrigated land: 
  20 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  overgrazing; desertification; water scarcity
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity
Note: 
  landlocked; population concentrated in eastern part of the country

@Botswana, People

Population: 
  1,359,352 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.45% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.19 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.72 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  39.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  63.05 years 
male: 
  60.03 years 
female: 
  66.16 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.06 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Motswana (singular), Batswana (plural) 
adjective: 
  Motswana (singular), Batswana (plural) 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Batswana 95%, Kalanga, Basarwa, and Kgalagadi 4%, white 1% 
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 50%, Christian 50% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Setswana 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over able to read and write simple sentences (1990 est.)
total population: 
  23% 
male: 
  32% 
female: 
  16% 
Labor force: 
  428,000 (1992)
by occupation: 
  220,000 formal sector employees, most others are engaged in cattle
  raising and subsistence agriculture (1992 est.); 14,300 are employed
  in various mines in South Africa (March 1992)

@Botswana, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Botswana 
conventional short form: 
  Botswana 
former: 
  Bechuanaland 
Digraph: 
  BC
Type: 
  parliamentary republic 
Capital: 
  Gaborone 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 districts; Central, Chobe, Ghanzi, Kgalagadi, Kgatleng, Kweneng,
  Ngamiland, North-East, South-East, Southern; in addition, there are 4
  town councils - Francistown, Gaborone, Lobaste, Selebi-Phikwe
Independence: 
  30 September 1966 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 30 September (1966) 
Constitution: 
  March 1965, effective 30 September 1966
Legal system: 
  based on Roman-Dutch law and local customary law; judicial review
  limited to matters of interpretation; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Sir Ketumile MASIRE (since 13 July 1980); Vice President
  Festus MOGAE (since 9 March 1992); election last held 7 October 1989
  (next to be held October 1994); results - President Sir Ketumile
  MASIRE was reelected by the National Assembly
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
House of Chiefs: 
  is a largely advisory 15-member body consisting of chiefs of the 8
  principal tribes, 4 elected subchiefs, and 3 members selected by the
  other 12
National Assembly: 
  elections last held 7 October 1989 (next to be held October 1994);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (38 total of which 34
  are elected and 4 are appointed) BDP 31, BNF 3, unfilled seats pending
  new elections 4
Judicial branch: 
  High Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Botswana Democratic Party (BDP), Sir Ketumile MASIRE; Botswana
  National Front (BNF), Kenneth KOMA; Botswana People's Party (BPP),
  Knight MARIPE; Botswana Independence Party (BIP), Motsamai MPHO
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, FLS, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMOZ,
  UNOMUR, UNOSOM, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Botsweletse Kingsley SEBELE 
chancery: 
  Suite 7M, 3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 244-4990 or 4991 
FAX: 
  (202) 244-4164 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Howard JETER  
embassy: 
  address NA, Gaborone 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 90, Gaborone 
telephone: 
  [267] 353-982 
FAX: 
  [267] 356-947 
Flag: 
  light blue with a horizontal white-edged black stripe in the center

@Botswana, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy has historically been based on cattle raising and crops.
  Agriculture today provides a livelihood for more than 80% of the
  population, but produces only about 50% of food needs. The driving
  force behind the rapid economic growth of the 1970s and 1980s has been
  the mining industry. This sector, mostly on the strength of diamonds,
  has gone from generating 25% of GDP in 1980 to 50% in 1991. No other
  sector has experienced such growth, especially not agriculture, which
  is plagued by erratic rainfall and poor soils. The unemployment rate
  remains a problem at 25%. Although diamond production was down
  slightly in 1992, substantial gains in coal output and manufacturing
  helped boost the economy. Recovery in sluggish diamond markets in
  second half 1993 helped Botswana achieve moderate growth of 3% for the
  year.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  14% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  25% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.7 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.99 billion, including capital expenditures of $652 million (FY94)
Exports: 
  $1.7 billion (f.o.b. 1992)
commodities: 
  diamonds 78%, copper and nickel 6%, meat 5%
partners: 
  Switzerland, UK, SACU (Southern African Customs Union)
Imports: 
  $1.8 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, vehicles and transport equipment, textiles, petroleum
  products
partners: 
  Switzerland, SACU (Southern African Customs Union), UK, US
External debt: 
  $344 million (December 1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.8% (FY91); accounts for about 53% of GDP, including
  mining
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  220,000 kW
production: 
  901 million kWh (in addition 228,000,000 kWh were imported)
consumption per capita: 
  874 kWh (1992 est.)
Industries: 
  mining of diamonds, copper, nickel, coal, salt, soda ash, potash;
  livestock processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for only 5% of GDP; subsistence farming predominates; cattle
  raising supports 50% of the population; must import up to of 80% of
  food needs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US aid (1992), $13 million; Norway (1992), $16 million; Sweden (1992),
  $15.5 million; Germany (1992), $3.6 million; EC/Lome-IV (1992), $3-6
  million in grants; $28.7 million in long-term projects (1992)
Currency: 
  1 pula (P) = 100 thebe
Exchange rates: 
  pula (P) per US$1 - 3.1309 (January 1994), 2.4190 (1993), 2.1327
  (1992), 2.0173 (1991), 1.8601 (1990), 2.0125 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Botswana, Communications

Railroads: 
  712 km 1.067-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  11,514 km 
paved: 
  1,600 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel 1,700 km; improved earth 5,177 km; unimproved
  earth 3,037 km 
Airports: 
total: 
  101 
usable: 
  90 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  30 
Telecommunications: 
  the small system is a combination of open-wire lines, microwave radio
  relay links, and a few radio-communications stations; 26,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 7 AM, 13 FM, no TV; 1 Indian Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Botswana, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Botswana Defense Force (including Army and Air Wing), Botswana
  National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 294,603; fit for military service 154,997; reach
  military age (18) annually 15,156 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $196 million, 4.9% of GDP (FY93/94)


@Bouvet Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Norway) 

@Bouvet Island, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the South Atlantic Ocean, 2,575 km south-southwest
  of the Cape of Good Hope (South Africa)
Map references: 
  Antarctic Region 
Area: 
total area: 
  58 sq km 
land area: 
  58 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  29.6 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  4 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  antarctic
Terrain: 
  volcanic; maximum elevation about 800 meters; coast is mostly
  inaccessible
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (all ice)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  covered by glacial ice

@Bouvet Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Bouvet Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Bouvet Island 
Digraph: 
  BV
Type: 
  territory of Norway 
Capital: 
  none; administered from Oslo, Norway
Independence: 
  none (territory of Norway)

@Bouvet Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Bouvet Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Telecommunications: 
  automatic meteorological station

@Bouvet Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Norway


@Brazil, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern South America, bordering the Atlantic Ocean
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  8,511,965 sq km 
land area: 
  8,456,510 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than the US
note: 
  includes Arquipelago de Fernando de Noronha, Atol das Rocas, Ilha da
  Trindade, Ilhas Martin Vaz, and Penedos de Sao Pedro e Sao Paulo
Land boundaries: 
  total 14,691 km, Argentina 1,224 km, Bolivia 3,400 km, Colombia 1,643
  km, French Guiana 673 km, Guyana 1,119 km, Paraguay 1,290 km, Peru
  1,560 km, Suriname 597 km, Uruguay 985 km, Venezuela 2,200 km 
Coastline: 
  7,491 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of the boundary with Paraguay, just west of Salto das
  Sete Quedas (Guaira Falls) on the Rio Parana, is in dispute; two short
  sections of boundary with Uruguay are in dispute - Arroio Invernada
  (Arroyo de la Invernada) area of the Rio Quarai (Rio Cuareim) and the
  islands at the confluence of the Rio Quarai and the Uruguay River
Climate: 
  mostly tropical, but temperate in south
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to rolling lowlands in north; some plains, hills,
  mountains, and narrow coastal belt
Natural resources: 
  iron ore, manganese, bauxite, nickel, uranium, phosphates, tin,
  hydropower, gold, platinum, petroleum, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  19% 
forest and woodland: 
  67% 
other: 
  6% 
Irrigated land: 
  27,000 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation in Amazon Basin; air and water pollution in Rio de
  Janeiro, Sao Paulo, and several other large cities; land degradation
  and water pollution caused by improper mining activities
natural hazards: 
  recurring droughts in northeast; floods and occasional frost in south
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Tropical Timber
Note: 
  largest country in South America; shares common boundaries with every
  South American country except Chile and Ecuador

@Brazil, People

Population: 
  158,739,257 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.28% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  21.48 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.63 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  59.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  62.25 years 
male: 
  57.41 years 
female: 
  67.32 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.44 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Brazilian(s) 
adjective: 
  Brazilian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Portuguese, Italian, German, Japanese, Amerindian, black 6%, white
  55%, mixed 38%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic (nominal) 70% 
Languages: 
  Portuguese (official), Spanish, English, French 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  81% 
male: 
  82% 
female: 
  80% 
Labor force: 
  57 million (1989 est.)
by occupation: 
  services 42%, agriculture 31%, industry 27%

@Brazil, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Federative Republic of Brazil 
conventional short form: 
  Brazil 
local long form: 
  Republica Federativa do Brasil 
local short form: 
  Brasil 
Digraph: 
  BR
Type: 
  federal republic 
Capital: 
  Brasilia 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1 federal district*
  (distrito federal); Acre, Alagoas, Amapa, Amazonas, Bahia, Ceara,
  Distrito Federal*, Espirito Santo, Goias, Maranhao, Mato Grosso, Mato
  Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para, Paraiba, Parana, Pernambuco, Piaui,
  Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rondonia,
  Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sao Paulo, Sergipe, Tocantins
Independence: 
  7 September 1822 (from Portugal)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 7 September (1822) 
Constitution: 
  5 October 1988
Legal system: 
  based on Roman codes; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  voluntary between 16 and 18 years of age and over 70; compulsory over
  18 and under 70 years of age
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Itamar FRANCO (since 29 December 1992); election last held
  15 November 1989, with runoff on 17 December 1989 (next to be held
  October 1994); results - Fernando COLLOR de Mello 53%, Luis Inacio
  LULA da Silva 47%; note - first free, direct presidential election
  since 1960; Fernando COLLOR de Mello was impeached in December 1992
  and succeeded by former Vice President Itamar FRANCO
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Congress (Congresso Nacional)
Federal Senate (Senado Federal): 
  election last held 3 October 1990 (next to be held October 1994);
  results - percent of vote by party PMBD 33%, PFL 16%, PSDB 12%, PDS
  4%, PDT 6%, PT 1%, other 28%; seats - (81 total as of 3 February 1991)
  PMDB 27, PFL 15, PSDB 10, PTB 8, PDT 5, other 16
Chamber of Deputies (Camara dos Deputados): 
  election last held 3 October 1990 (next to be held October 1994);
  results - PMDB 21%, PFL 17%, PDT 9%, PDS 8%, PRN 7.9%, PTB 7%, PT 7%,
  other 23.1%; seats - (503 total as of 3 February 1991) PMDB 108, PFL
  87, PDT 46, PDS 43, PRN 40, PTB 35, PT 35, other 109
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Federal Tribunal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Reconstruction Party (PRN), Daniel TOURINHO, president;
  Brazilian Democratic Movement Party (PMDB), Luiz HENRIQUE da Silveira,
  president; Liberal Front Party (PFL), Jorge BORNHAUSEN, president;
  Workers' Party (PT), Luis Inacio LULA da Silva, president; Brazilian
  Workers' Party (PTB), Rodrigues PALMA, president; Democratic Workers'
  Party (PDT), Leonel BRIZOLA, president; Progressive Renewal Party
  (PPR), Paulo MALUF, president; Brazilian Social Democracy Party
  (PSDB), Tasso JEREISSATI, president; Popular Socialist Party (PPS),
  Roberto FREIRE, president; Communist Party of Brazil (PCdoB), Joao
  AMAZONAS, secretary general; Liberal Party (PL), Flavio ROCHA,
  president
Other political or pressure groups: 
  left wing of the Catholic Church and labor unions allied to leftist
  Workers' Party are critical of government's social and economic
  policies
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77,
  GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LAES, LAIA, LORCS, MERCOSUR, NAM (observer), OAS, ONUSAL, OPANAL, PCA,
  RG, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNOMOZ, UNOMUR,
  UNPROFOR, UPU, WCL, WHO, WFTU, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Paulo Tarso FLECHA de LIMA 
chancery: 
  3006 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 745-2700 
FAX: 
  (202) 745-2827 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Hong Kong (Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands),
  Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
consulate(s): 
  Houston and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Melvyn LEVITSKY 
embassy: 
  Avenida das Nacoes, Lote 3, Brasilia, Distrito Federal 
mailing address: 
  APO AA 34030 
telephone: 
  [55] (61) 321-7272 
FAX: 
  [55] (61) 225-9136 
consulate(s) general: 
  Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo 
consulate(s): 
  Porto Alegre, Recife 
Flag: 
  green with a large yellow diamond in the center bearing a blue
  celestial globe with 27 white five-pointed stars (one for each state
  and district) arranged in the same pattern as the night sky over
  Brazil; the globe has a white equatorial band with the motto ORDEM E
  PROGRESSO (Order and Progress)

@Brazil, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy, with large agrarian, mining, and manufacturing sectors,
  entered the 1990s with declining real growth, runaway inflation, an
  unserviceable foreign debt of $122 billion, and a lack of policy
  direction. In addition, the economy remained highly regulated,
  inward-looking, and protected by substantial trade and investment
  barriers. Ownership of major industrial and mining facilities is
  divided among private interests - including several multinationals -
  and the government. Most large agricultural holdings are private, with
  the government channeling financing to this sector. Conflicts between
  large landholders and landless peasants have produced intermittent
  violence. The COLLOR government, which assumed office in March 1990,
  launched an ambitious reform program that sought to modernize and
  reinvigorate the economy by stabilizing prices, deregulating the
  economy, and opening it to increased foreign competition. The
  government also obtained an IMF standby loan in January 1992 and
  reached agreements with commercial bankers on the repayment of
  interest arrears and on the reduction of debt and debt service
  payments. Galloping inflation (the rate doubled in 1992 and by March
  1994 had risen to 42% per month) continues to undermine economic
  stability. Itamar FRANCO, who assumed the presidency following
  President COLLOR'S resignation in December 1992, was out of step with
  COLLOR'S reform agenda; initiatives to redress fiscal problems,
  privatize state enterprises, and liberalize trade and investment
  policies have lost momentum. Brazil's natural resources remain a
  major, long-term economic strength
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $785 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $5,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2,709% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  4.9% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $113 billion 
expenditures: 
  $109 billion, including capital expenditures of $23 billion (1992)
Exports: 
  $38.8 billion (f.o.b. 1993)
commodities: 
  iron ore, soybean bran, orange juice, footwear, coffee, motor vehicle
  parts
partners: 
  EC 27.6%, Latin America 21.8%, US 17.4%, Japan 6.3% (1993)
Imports: 
  $25.7 billion (f.o.b. 1993)
commodities: 
  crude oil, capital goods, chemical products, foodstuffs, coal
partners: 
  US 23.3%, EC 22.5%, Middle East 13.0%, Latin America 11.8%, Japan 6.5%
  (1993)
External debt: 
  $119 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 9.5% (1993); accounts for 39% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  63,765,000 kW
production: 
  242.184 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,531 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles and other consumer goods, shoes, chemicals, cement, lumber,
  iron ore, steel, motor vehicles and auto parts, metalworking, capital
  goods, tin
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 11% of GDP; world's largest producer and exporter of
  coffee and orange juice concentrate and second-largest exporter of
  soybeans; other products - rice, corn, sugarcane, cocoa, beef;
  self-sufficient in food, except for wheat
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis and coca, mostly for domestic
  consumption; government has a modest eradication program to control
  cannabis and coca cultivation; important transshipment country for
  Bolivian and Colombian cocaine headed for the US and Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $2.5 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $10.2
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $284 million; former Communist
  countries (1970-89), $1.3 billion 
Currency: 
  1 cruzeiro real (CR$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  CR$ per US$1 - 390.845 (January 1994), 88.449 (1993), 4.513 (1992),
  0.407 (1991), 0.068 (1990), 0.003 (1989)
note: 
  on 1 August 1993 the cruzeiro real, equal to 1,000 cruzeiros, was
  introduced; another new currency, the real, will be introduced on 1
  July 1994
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Brazil, Communications

Railroads: 
  30,133 km total; 24,690 km 1.000-meter gauge, 5,120 km 1.600-meter
  gauge, 310 km mixed 1.600-1.000-meter gauge, 13 km 0.760-meter gauge;
  2,150 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  1,670,148 km 
paved: 
  161,503 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel/earth  1,508,645 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  50,000 km navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,000 km; petroleum products 3,804 km; natural gas 1,095 km 
Ports: 
  Belem, Fortaleza, Ilheus, Manaus, Paranagua, Porto Alegre, Recife, Rio
  de Janeiro, Rio Grande, Salvador, Santos
Merchant marine: 
  220 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,139,176 GRT/8,695,682 DWT,
  bulk 53, cargo 40, chemical tanker 14, combination ore/oil 12,
  container 11, liquified gas 11, oil tanker 62, passenger-cargo 5,
  refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11 
note: 
  in addition, 1 naval tanker is sometimes used commercially
Airports: 
total: 
  3,581 
usable: 
  3,024 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  436 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  22 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  598 
Telecommunications: 
  good system; extensive microwave radio relay facilities; 9.86 million
  telephones; broadcast stations - 1,223 AM, no FM, 112 TV, 151
  shortwave; 3 coaxial submarine cables, 3 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  stations and 64 domestic satellite earth stations

@Brazil, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Brazilian Army, Navy of Brazil (including Marines), Brazilian Air
  Force, Military Police (paramilitary)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 43,489,704; fit for military service 29,286,530; reach
  military age (18) annually 1,674,930 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.1 billion, 3% of GDP (1990)


@British Indian Ocean Territory

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@British Indian Ocean Territory, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, in the Indian Ocean, south of India about halfway
  between Africa and Indonesia
Map references: 
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  60 sq km 
land area: 
  60 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes the island of Diego Garcia
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  698 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  the entire Chagos Archipelago is claimed by Mauritius
Climate: 
  tropical marine; hot, humid, moderated by trade winds
Terrain: 
  flat and low (up to 4 meters in elevation)
Natural resources: 
  coconuts, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  archipelago of 2,300 islands; Diego Garcia, largest and southernmost
  island, occupies strategic location in central Indian Ocean; island is
  site of joint US-UK military facility

@British Indian Ocean Territory, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants
note: 
  there are UK-US military personnel; civilian inhabitants, known as the
  Ilois, evacuated to Mauritius before construction of UK-US military
  facilities

@British Indian Ocean Territory, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  British Indian Ocean Territory 
conventional short form: 
  none 
Abbreviation: 
  BIOT 
Digraph: 
  IO
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  none 
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Commissioner Thomas GEORGE (since September 1991); Administrator Mr.
  R. G. WELLS (since NA 1991); note - both reside in the UK 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  white with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and six
  blue wavy horizontal stripes bearing a palm tree and yellow crown
  centered on the outer half of the flag

@British Indian Ocean Territory, Economy

Overview: 
  All economic activity is concentrated on the largest island of Diego
  Garcia, where joint UK-US defense facilities are located. Construction
  projects and various services needed to support the military
  installations are done by military and contract employees from the UK,
  Mauritius, the Philippines, and the US. There are no industrial or
  agricultural activities on the islands.
Electricity: 
  provided by the US military

@British Indian Ocean Territory, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  short stretch of paved road between port and airfield on Diego Garcia
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Diego Garcia
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 on Diego Garcia
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,229-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  minimal facilities; broadcast stations (operated by US Navy) - 1 AM, 1
  FM, 1 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@British Indian Ocean Territory, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@British Virgin Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@British Virgin Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about 110 km east of Puerto
  Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  150 sq km 
land area: 
  150 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.8 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes the island of Anegada
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  80 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical; humid; temperatures moderated by trade winds
Terrain: 
  coral islands relatively flat; volcanic islands steep, hilly
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  7% 
meadows and pastures: 
  33% 
forest and woodland: 
  7% 
other: 
  33% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes and tropical storms (July to October)
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strong ties to nearby US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico

@British Virgin Islands, People

Population: 
  12,864 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.24% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  20.31 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.09 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.8 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  19.51 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.67 years 
male: 
  70.83 years 
female: 
  74.65 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.27 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  British Virgin Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  British Virgin Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 90%, white, Asian 
Religions: 
  Protestant 86% (Methodist 45%, Anglican 21%, Church of God 7%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist 5%, Baptist 4%, Jehovah's Witnesses 2%, other
  2%), Roman Catholic 6%, none 2%, other 6% (1981)
Languages: 
  English (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  4,911 (1980)
by occupation: 
  NA

@British Virgin Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  British Virgin Islands 
Abbreviation: 
  BVI 
Digraph: 
  VI
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Road Town 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Territory Day, 1 July 
Constitution: 
  1 June 1977
Legal system: 
  English law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  Peter Alfred PENFOLD (since 14 October 1991) 
head of government: 
  Chief Minister H. Lavity STOUTT (since NA September 1986) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; appointed by the governor
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council: 
  election last held 12 November 1990 (next to be held by November
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (9 total) VIP 6,
  IPM 1, independents 2
Judicial branch: 
  Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  United Party (UP), Conrad MADURO; Virgin Islands Party (VIP), H.
  Lavity STOUTT; Independent Progressive Movement (IPM), E. Walwyln
  BREWLEY
Member of: 
  CARICOM (associate), CDB, ECLAC (associate), INTERPOL (subbureau),
  IOC, OECS (associate), UNESCO (associate) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Virgin Islander coat of arms centered in the outer half of the flag;
  the coat of arms depicts a woman flanked on either side by a vertical
  column of six oil lamps above a scroll bearing the Latin word VIGILATE
  (Be Watchful)

@British Virgin Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy, one of the most prosperous in the Caribbean area, is
  highly dependent on the tourist industry, which generates about 21% of
  the national income. In 1985 the government offered offshore
  registration to companies wishing to incorporate in the islands, and,
  in consequence, incorporation fees generated about $2 million in 1987.
  The economy slowed in 1991 because of the poor performances of the
  tourist sector and tight commercial bank credit. Livestock raising is
  the most significant agricultural activity. The islands' crops,
  limited by poor soils, are unable to meet food requirements.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $133 million (1991)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $10,600 (1991)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.5% (1990 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NEGL% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $51 million 
expenditures: 
  $88 million, including capital expenditures of $38 million (1991)
Exports: 
  $2.7 million (f.o.b., 1988)
commodities: 
  rum, fresh fish, gravel, sand, fruits, animals
partners: 
  Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US
Imports: 
  $11.5 million (c.i.f., 1988)
commodities: 
  building materials, automobiles, foodstuffs, machinery
partners: 
  Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US
External debt: 
  $4.5 million (1985)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4% (1985)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,500 kW
production: 
  43 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,510 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourism, light industry, construction, rum, concrete block, offshore
  financial center
Agriculture: 
  livestock (including poultry), fish, fruit, vegetables
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@British Virgin Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  106 km (1983)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Road Town
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  3,000 telephones; worldwide external telephone service; submarine
  cable communication links to Bermuda; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no
  FM, 1 TV

@British Virgin Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Brunei, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, on the northern coast of Borneo almost completely
  surrounded by Malaysia
Map references: 
  Asia, Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  5,770 sq km 
land area: 
  5,270 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Delaware
Land boundaries: 
  total 381 km, Malysia 381 km 
Coastline: 
  161 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  may wish to purchase the Malaysian salient that divides the country;
  all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam;
  parts of them are claimed by Malaysia and the Philippines; in 1984,
  Brunei established an exclusive fishing zone that encompasses Louisa
  Reef, but has not publicly claimed the island
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid, rainy
Terrain: 
  flat coastal plain rises to mountains in east; hilly lowland in west
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  79% 
other: 
  18% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not
  ratified - Law of the Sea
natural hazards: 
  typhoons, earthquakes, and severe flooding are rare
Note: 
  close to vital sea lanes through South China Sea linking Indian and
  Pacific Oceans; two parts physically separated by Malaysia; almost an
  enclave of Malaysia

@Brunei, People

Population: 
  284,653 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.7% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  26.18 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.04 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  5.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  25.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.1 years 
male: 
  69.46 years 
female: 
  72.78 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.43 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bruneian(s) 
adjective: 
  Bruneian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Malay 64%, Chinese 20%, other 16% 
Religions: 
  Muslim (official) 63%, Buddhism 14%, Christian 8%, indigenous beliefs
  and other 15% (1981)
Languages: 
  Malay (official), English, Chinese 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1981)
total population: 
  77% 
male: 
  85% 
female: 
  69% 
Labor force: 
  89,000 (includes members of the Army)
by occupation: 
  government 47.5%, production of oil, natural gas, services, and
  construction 41.9%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 3.8% (1986)
note: 
  33% of labor force is foreign (1988)

@Brunei, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Negara Brunei Darussalam 
conventional short form: 
  Brunei 
Digraph: 
  BX
Type: 
  constitutional sultanate 
Capital: 
  Bandar Seri Begawan 
Administrative divisions: 
  4 districts (daerah-daerah, singular - daerah); Belait, Brunei and
  Muara, Temburong, Tutong
Independence: 
  1 January 1984 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  National Day 23 February (1984) 
Constitution: 
  29 September 1959 (some provisions suspended under a State of
  Emergency since December 1962, others since independence on 1 January
  1984)
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Sultan and Prime Minister His Majesty Paduka Seri Baginda Sultan Haji
  HASSANAL Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah (since 5 October 1967) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Cabinet Ministers; composed chiefly of members of the royal
  family
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council (Majlis Masyuarat Megeri): 
  elections last held in March 1962; in 1970 the Council was changed to
  an appointive body by decree of the sultan; an elected legislative
  Council is being considered as part of constitution reform, but
  elections are unlikely for several years
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Brunei United National Party (inactive), Anak HASANUDDIN, chairman;
  Brunei National Democratic Party (the first legal political party and
  now banned), leader NA
Member of: 
  APEC, ASEAN, C, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, GATT, ICAO, IDB, IMO, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM,
  OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UPU, UNTAC, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador JAYA bin Abdul Latif 
chancery: 
  2600 Virginia Avenue NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20037 
telephone: 
  (202) 342-0159 
FAX: 
  (202) 342-0158 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Theresa A. TULL 
embassy: 
  Third Floor, Teck Guan Plaza, Jalan Sultan, Bandar Seri Begawan 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy Box B, APO AP 96440 
telephone: 
  [673] (2) 229-670 
FAX: 
  [673] (2) 225-293 
Flag: 
  yellow with two diagonal bands of white (top, almost double width) and
  black starting from the upper hoist side; the national emblem in red
  is superimposed at the center; the emblem includes a swallow-tailed
  flag on top of a winged column within an upturned crescent above a
  scroll and flanked by two upraised hands

@Brunei, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is a mixture of foreign and domestic entrepreneurship,
  government regulation and welfare measures, and village tradition. It
  is almost totally supported by exports of crude oil and natural gas,
  with revenues from the petroleum sector accounting for more than 50%
  of GDP. Per capita GDP is among the highest in the Third World, and
  substantial income from overseas investment supplements domestic
  production. The government provides for all medical services and
  subsidizes food and housing.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $2.5 billion (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $9,000 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  3.7% (1989)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $255 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $2.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil, liquefied natural gas, petroleum products
partners: 
  Japan 53%, UK 12%, South Korea 9%, Thailand 7%, Singapore 5% (1990)
Imports: 
  $2 billion (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods, food, chemicals
partners: 
  Singapore 35%, UK 26%, Switzerland 9%, US 9%, Japan 5% (1990)
External debt: 
  $0 
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 12.9% (1987); accounts for 52.4% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  310,000 kW
production: 
  890 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,300 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  petroleum, petroleum refining, liquefied natural gas, construction
Agriculture: 
  imports about 80% of its food needs; principal crops and livestock
  include rice, cassava, bananas, buffaloes, and pigs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-87), $20.6 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),  $153
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Bruneian dollar (B$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Bruneian dollars (B$) per US$1 - 1.6032 (January 1994), 1.6158 (1993),
  1.6290 (1992), 1.7276 (1991), 1.8125 (1990), 1.9503 (1989); note - the
  Bruneian dollar is at par with the Singapore dollar
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Brunei, Communications

Railroads: 
  13 km 0.610-meter narrow-gauge private line
Highways: 
total: 
  1,090 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 370 km (with another 52 km under construction)
unpaved: 
  gravel or earth 720 km 
Inland waterways: 
  209 km; navigable by craft drawing less than 1.2 meters
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 135 km; petroleum products 418 km; natural gas 920 km 
Ports: 
  Kuala Belait, Muara
Merchant marine: 
  7 liquefied gas carriers (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 348,476
  GRT/340,635 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runway over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runway 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runway 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  service throughout country is adequate for present needs;
  international service good to adjacent Malaysia; radiobroadcast
  coverage good; 33,000 telephones (1987); broadcast stations - 4 AM/FM,
  1 TV; 74,000 radio receivers (1987); satellite earth stations - 1
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT

@Brunei, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Land Force, Navy, Air Force, Royal Brunei Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 79,486; fit for military service 46,258; reach
  military age (18) annually 2,756 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $300 million, 9% of GDP (1990)


@Bulgaria, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between
  Romania and Turkey
Map references: 
  Africa, Arctic Region, Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Middle
  East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  110,910 sq km 
land area: 
  110,550 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Tennessee
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,808 km, Greece 494 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia 148 km, Romania 608 km, Serbia and Montenegro 318 km (all
  with Serbia), Turkey 240 km 
Coastline: 
  354 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; cold, damp winters; hot, dry summers
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with lowlands in north and south
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, copper, lead, zinc, coal, timber, arable land 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  34% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  35% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from industrial emissions; rivers polluted from raw
  sewage, heavy metals, detergents; deforestation; forest damage from
  air pollution; soil contamination from heavy metals from metallurgical
  plants and industrial wastes
natural hazards: 
  subject to earthquakes, landslides
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile
  Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location near Turkish Straits; controls key land routes from
  Europe to Middle East and Asia

@Bulgaria, People

Population: 
  8,799,986 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -0.32% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.71 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.24 years 
male: 
  69.99 years 
female: 
  76.67 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.71 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Bulgarian(s) 
adjective: 
  Bulgarian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Bulgarian 85.3%, Turk 8.5%, Gypsy 2.6%, Macedonian 2.5%, Armenian
  0.3%, Russian 0.2%, other 0.6% 
Religions: 
  Bulgarian Orthodox 85%, Muslim 13%, Jewish 0.8%, Roman Catholic 0.5%,
  Uniate Catholic 0.2%, Protestant, Gregorian-Armenian, and other 0.5% 
Languages: 
  Bulgarian; secondary languages closely correspond to ethnic breakdown
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1970 est.)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  4.3 million 
by occupation: 
  industry 33%, agriculture 20%, other 47% (1987)

@Bulgaria, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Bulgaria 
conventional short form: 
  Bulgaria 
Digraph: 
  BU
Type: 
  emerging democracy 
Capital: 
  Sofia 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces (oblasti, singular - oblast); Burgas, Grad Sofiya,
  Khaskovo, Lovech, Montana, Plovdiv, Ruse, Sofiya, Varna
Independence: 
  22 September 1908 (from Ottoman Empire)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day 3 March (1878) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 12 July 1991
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system, with Soviet law influence; has accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Zhelyu Mitev ZHELEV (since 1 August 1990); Vice President
  (vacant); election last held January 1992; results - Zhelyu ZHELEV was
  elected by popular vote
head of government: 
  Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister) Lyuben Borisov
  BEROV (since 30 December 1992); Deputy Chairman of the Council of
  Ministers (Deputy Prime Minister) Evgeniy MATINCHEV (since 30 December
  1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; elected by the National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Narodno Sobranie): 
  last held 13 October 1991; results - UDF (and breakaway factions) 34%,
  BSP 33%, MRF 7.5%; seats - (240 total) UDF 110, BSP 106, Movement for
  Rights and Freedoms 24
note: 
  the UDF split in March 1993 to form the New Union for Democracy (NUD)
  with 18 seats, and the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) with 92 seats
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), Filip DIMITROV, chairman, an
  alliance of approximately 20 pro-Democratic parties including United
  Democratic Center, Democratic Party, Radical Democratic Party,
  Christian Democratic Union, Alternative Social Liberal Party,
  Republican Party, Civic Initiative Movement, and about a dozen other
  groups; Movement for Rights and Freedoms (mainly ethnic Turkish party)
  (MRF), Ahmed DOGAN, chairman; Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), Zhan
  VIDENOV, chairman; New Union for Democracy (NUD), Dimitar LUDZHEV,
  chairman
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Ecoglasnost; Podkrepa (Support) Labor Confederation; Fatherland Union;
  Bulgarian Democratic Youth (formerly Communist Youth Union);
  Confederation of Independent Trade Unions of Bulgaria (KNSB);
  Nationwide Committee for Defense of National Interests; Peasant Youth
  League; Bulgarian Agrarian National Union - United (BZNS); Bulgarian
  Democratic Center; "Nikola Petkov" Bulgarian Agrarian National Union;
  Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization - Union of Macedonian
  Societies (IMRO-UMS); numerous regional, ethnic, and national interest
  groups with various agendas
Member of: 
  ACCT (observer), BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI (participating), CSCE, EBRD,
  ECE, FAO, G-9, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, NACC, NAM (guest), NSG, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UNTAC, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ognyan Raytchev PISHEV 
chancery: 
  1621 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 387-7969 
FAX: 
  (202) 234-7973 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William D. MONTGOMERY 
embassy: 
  1 Saborna Street, Sofia 
mailing address: 
  Unit  25402, Sofia; APO AE 09213 
telephone: 
  [359] (2) 88-48-01 through 05 
FAX: 
  [359] (2) 80-19-77 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), green, and red; the
  national emblem formerly on the hoist side of the white stripe has
  been removed - it contained a rampant lion within a wreath of wheat
  ears below a red five-pointed star and above a ribbon bearing the
  dates 681 (first Bulgarian state established) and 1944 (liberation
  from Nazi control)

@Bulgaria, Economy

Overview: 
  The Bulgarian economy continued its painful adjustment in 1993 from
  the misdirected development undertaken during four decades of
  Communist rule. Many aspects of a market economy have been put in
  place and have begun to function, but much of the economy, especially
  the industrial sector, has yet to re-establish market links lost with
  the collapse of other centrally planned Eastern European economies.
  The prices of many imported industrial inputs, especially energy
  products, have risen markedly, and falling real wages have not
  sufficed to restore competitiveness. The trade deficit, exacerbated by
  UN trade sanctions against neighboring Serbia, grew in late 1993,
  accelerating the depreciation of the lev. These difficulties in
  adjusting to the challenges of a more open system, together with a
  severe drought, caused nonagricultural output to fall by perhaps 8% in
  1993. The government plans more extensive privatization in 1994 to
  improve the management of state enterprises and to encourage foreign
  investment in ailing state firms. Bulgaria resumed payments on its $10
  billion in commercial debt in 1993 following the negotiation of a 50%
  write-off. An IMF program and second agreement with official creditors
  on Bulgaria's smaller amount of official debt are required to close
  the debt deal.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $33.9 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  64% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  16% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $14 billion 
expenditures: 
  $17.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $610 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $3.5 billion (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment 30.6%; agricultural products 24%; manufactured
  consumer goods 22.2%; fuels, minerals, raw materials, and metals
  10.5%; other 12.7% (1991)
partners: 
  former CEMA countries 57.7% (USSR 48.6%, Poland 2.1%, Czechoslovakia
  0.9%); developed countries 26.3% (Germany 4.8%, Greece 2.2%); less
  developed countries 15.9% (Libya 2.1%, Iran 0.7%) (1991)
Imports: 
  $2.8 billion (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  fuels, minerals, and raw materials 58.7%; machinery and equipment
  15.8%; manufactured consumer goods 4.4%; agricultural products 15.2%;
  other 5.9%
partners: 
  former CEMA countries 51.0% (former USSR 43.2%, Poland 3.7%);
  developed countries 32.8% (Germany 7.0%, Austria 4.7%); less developed
  countries 16.2% (Iran 2.8%, Libya 2.5%)
External debt: 
  $12 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -10% (1993 est.); accounts for about 37% of GDP (1990)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  11,500,000 kW
production: 
  45 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,070 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  machine building and metal working, food processing, chemicals,
  textiles, building materials, ferrous and nonferrous metals
Agriculture: 
  climate and soil conditions support livestock raising and the growing
  of various grain crops, oilseeds, vegetables, fruits, and tobacco;
  more than one-third of the arable land devoted to grain; world's
  fourth-largest tobacco exporter; surplus food producer
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for southwest Asian heroin transiting the Balkan
  route
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 lev (Lv) = 100 stotinki
Exchange rates: 
  leva (Lv) per US$1 - 32.00 (January 1994), 24.56 (January 1993), 17.18
  (January 1992), 16.13 (March 1991), 0.7446 (November 1990), 0.84
  (1989); note - floating exchange rate since February 1991
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Bulgaria, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,300 km total, all government owned (1987); 4,055 km 1.435-meter
  standard gauge, 245 km narrow gauge; 917 km double track; 2,640 km
  electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  36,930 km 
paved: 
  33,902 km (including 276 km expressways)
unpaved: 
  earth 3,028 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  470 km (1987)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 193 km; petroleum products 525 km; natural gas 1,400 km
  (1992)
Ports: 
  coastal - Burgas, Varna, Varna West; inland - Ruse, Vidin, and Lom on
  the Danube
Merchant marine: 
  111 ships (1,000 GRT and over) totaling 1,225,996 GRT/1,829,642 DWT,
  bulk 48, cargo 30, chemical carrier 4, container 2, oil tanker 16,
  passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6,
  short-sea passenger 2 
note: 
  Bulgaria owns 1 ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 8,717 DWT operating
  under Liberian registry
Airports: 
total: 
  487 
usable: 
  85 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  32 
with runways over 3659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  21 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  36 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  extensive but antiquated transmission system of coaxial cable and
  microwave radio relay; 2.6 million telephones; direct dialing to 36
  countries; phone density is 29 phones per 100 persons (1992); almost
  two-thirds of the lines are residential; 67% of Sofia households have
  phones (November 1988); telephone service is available in most
  villages; broadcast stations - 20 AM, 15 FM, and 29 TV, with 1 Soviet
  TV repeater in Sofia; 2.1 million TV sets (1990); 92% of country
  receives No. 1 television program (May 1990); 1 satellite ground
  station using Intersputnik; INTELSAT is used through a Greek earth
  station

@Bulgaria, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Frontier Troops, Internal
  Troops 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,175,921; fit for military service 1,816,484; reach
  military age (19) annually 70,306 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  5.77 billion leva, NA% of GDP (1993 est.); note - conversion of
  defense expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate
  could produce misleading results


@Burkina, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, between Ghana and Mali
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  274,200 sq km 
land area: 
  273,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Colorado
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,192 km, Benin 306 km, Ghana 548 km, Cote d'Ivoire 584 km, Mali
  1,000 km, Niger 628 km, Togo 126 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  the disputed international boundary between Burkina and Mali was
  submitted to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in October 1983
  and the ICJ issued its final ruling in December 1986, which both sides
  agreed to accept; Burkina and Mali are proceeding with boundary
  demarcation, including the tripoint with Niger
Climate: 
  tropical; warm, dry winters; hot, wet summers
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to dissected, undulating plains; hills in west and
  southeast
Natural resources: 
  manganese, limestone, marble; small deposits of gold, antimony,
  copper, nickel, bauxite, lead, phosphates, zinc, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  37% 
forest and woodland: 
  26% 
other: 
  27% 
Irrigated land: 
  160 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  recent droughts and desertification severely affecting agricultural
  activities, population distribution, and the economy; overgrazing;
  soil degradation; deforestation
natural hazards: 
  recurring droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Marine
  Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not
  ratified - Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  landlocked

@Burkina, People

Population: 
  10,134,661 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.81% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  48.42 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.2 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  118.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  47.03 years 
male: 
  46.18 years 
female: 
  47.9 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.94 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Burkinabe (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Burkinabe 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Mossi (about 2.5 million), Gurunsi, Senufo, Lobi, Bobo, Mande, Fulani 
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 40%, Muslim 50%, Christian (mainly Roman Catholic)
  10% 
Languages: 
  French (official), tribal languages belong to Sudanic family, spoken
  by 90% of the population
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  18% 
male: 
  28% 
female: 
  9% 
Labor force: 
  NA (most adults are employed in subsistance agriculture; 52% of
  population is 15 years of age or older)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 80%, industry 15%, commerce, services, and government 5%
note: 
  20% of male labor force migrates annually to neighboring countries for
  seasonal employment (1984)

@Burkina, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Burkina Faso 
conventional short form: 
  Burkina 
former: 
  Upper Volta 
Digraph: 
  UV
Type: 
  parliamentary 
Capital: 
  Ouagadougou 
Administrative divisions: 
  30 provinces; Bam, Bazega, Bougouriba, Boulgou, Boulkiemde,
  Ganzourgou, Gnagna, Gourma, Houet, Kadiogo, Kenedougou, Komoe, Kossi,
  Kouritenga, Mouhoun, Namentenga, Naouri, Oubritenga, Oudalan, Passore,
  Poni, Sanguie, Sanmatenga, Seno, Sissili, Soum, Sourou, Tapoa,
  Yatenga, Zoundweogo
Independence: 
  5 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Revolution, 4 August (1983) 
Constitution: 
  2 June 1991
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and customary law
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Captain Blaise COMPAORE (since 15 October 1987); election
  last held December 1991
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Roch KABORE (since March 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers;  appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Assembly of People's Deputies: 
  elections last held 24 May 1992 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (107 total), ODP-MT 78, CNPP-PSD
  12, RDA 6, ADF 4, other 7
note: 
  the current law also provides for a second consultative chamber, which
  had not been formally constituted as of 1 July 1992
Judicial branch: 
  Appeals Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Organization for People's Democracy- Labor Movement (ODP-MT), ruling
  party, Simon COMPAORE, Secretary General; National Convention of
  Progressive Patriots-Social Democratic Party (CNPP-PSD), Moussa BOLY;
  African Democratic Rally (RDA), Gerard Kango OUEDRAOGO; Alliance for
  Democracy and Federation (ADF), Amadou Michel NANA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  committees for the defense of the revolution; watchdog/political
  action groups throughout the country in both organizations and
  communities
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Thomas Yara KAMBOU 
chancery: 
  2340 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-5577 or 6895 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Donald J. McCONNELL 
embassy: 
  Avenue Raoul Follerau, Ouagadougou 
mailing address: 
  01 B. P. 35, Ouagadougou 
telephone: 
  [226] 30-67- 23 through 25 
FAX: 
  [226] 31-23-68 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green with a yellow
  five-pointed star in the center; uses the popular pan-African colors
  of Ethiopia

@Burkina, Economy

Overview: 
  One of the poorest countries in the world, Burkina has a high
  population density, few natural resources, and relatively infertile
  soil. Economic development is hindered by a poor communications
  network within a landlocked country. Agriculture provides about 40% of
  GDP and is entirely of a subsistence nature. Industry, dominated by
  unprofitable government-controlled corporations, accounts for about
  15% of GDP.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.7% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  -0.8% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $483 million 
expenditures: 
  $548 million, including capital expenditures of $189 million (1992)
Exports: 
  $300 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  cotton, gold, animal products
partners: 
  EC 42%, Cote d'Ivoire 11%, Taiwan 15%
Imports: 
  $685 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery, food products, petroleum
partners: 
  EC 49%, Africa 24%, Japan 6%
External debt: 
  $865 million (December 1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.7% (1992); accounts for about 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  120,000 kW
production: 
  320 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  40 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  cotton lint, beverages, agricultural processing, soap, cigarettes,
  textiles, gold mining and extraction
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 40% of GDP; cash crops - peanuts, shea nuts,
  sesame, cotton; food crops - sorghum, millet, corn, rice; livestock;
  not self-sufficient in food grains
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $294 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2.9
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89),  $113 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05 (January 1994), 283.16 (1993),
  264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26 (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994 the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Burkina, Communications

Railroads: 
  620 km total; 520 km Ouagadougou to Cote d'Ivoire border and 100 km
  Ouagadougou to Kaya; all 1.00-meter gauge and single track
Highways: 
total: 
  16,500 km 
paved: 
  1,300 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 7,400 km; unimproved earth 7,800 km (1985)
Airports: 
total: 
  48 
usable: 
  38 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  8 
Telecommunications: 
  all services only fair; microwave radio relay, wire, and radio
  communication stations in use; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 1 FM, 2 TV;
  1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Burkina, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, National Gendarmerie, National Police, People's
  Militia 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,013,763; fit for military service 1,029,960 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Burma, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, bordering the Bay of Bengal, between Bangladesh and
  Thailand
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  678,500 sq km 
land area: 
  657,740 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,876 km, Bangladesh 193 km, China 2,185 km, India 1,463 km,
  Laos 235 km, Thailand 1,800 km 
Coastline: 
  1,930 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or to the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical monsoon; cloudy, rainy, hot, humid summers (southwest
  monsoon, June to September); less cloudy, scant rainfall, mild
  temperatures, lower humidity during winter (northeast monsoon,
  December to April)
Terrain: 
  central lowlands ringed by steep, rugged highlands
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, timber, tin, antimony, zinc, copper, tungsten, lead, coal,
  some marble, limestone, precious stones, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  15% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  49% 
other: 
  34% 
Irrigated land: 
  10,180 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to destructive earthquakes and cyclones; flooding and
  landslides common during rainy season (June to September)
international agreements: 
  party to - Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location near major Indian Ocean shipping lanes

@Burma, People

Population: 
  44,277,014 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.86% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.45 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.84 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  63.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  59.98 years 
male: 
  57.94 years 
female: 
  62.15 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.64 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Burmese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Burmese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Burman 68%, Shan 9%, Karen 7%, Rakhine 4%, Chinese 3%, Mon 2%, Indian
  2%, other 5% 
Religions: 
  Buddhist 89%, Christian 4% (Baptist 3%, Roman Catholic 1%), Muslim 4%,
  animist beliefs 1%, other 2% 
Languages: 
  Burmese; minority ethnic groups have their own languages
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  81% 
male: 
  89% 
female: 
  72% 
Labor force: 
  16.007 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 65.2%, industry 14.3%, trade 10.1%, government 6.3%, other
  4.1% (FY89 est.)

@Burma, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Union of Burma 
conventional short form: 
  Burma 
local long form: 
  Pyidaungzu Myanma Naingngandaw (translated by the US Government as
  Union of Myanma and by the Burmese as Union of Myanmar)
local short form: 
  Myanma Naingngandaw 
former: 
  Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma 
Digraph: 
  BM
Type: 
  military regime 
Capital: 
  Rangoon (sometimes translated as Yangon)
Administrative divisions: 
  7 divisions* (yin-mya, singular - yin) and 7 states (pyine-mya,
  singular - pyine); Chin State, Irrawaddy*, Kachin State, Karan State,
  Kayah State, Magwe*, Mandalay*, Mon State, Pegu*, Rakhine State,
  Rangoon*, Sagaing*, Shan State, Tenasserim*
Independence: 
  4 January 1948 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 4 January (1948) 
Constitution: 
  3 January 1974 (suspended since 18 September 1988); National
  Convention started on 9 January 1993 to draft chapter headings for a
  new constitution
Legal system: 
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Chairman of the State Law and Order Restoration Council Gen. THAN SHWE
  (since 23 April 1992) 
State Law and Order Restoration Council: 
  military junta which assumed power 18 September 1988
Legislative branch: 
People's Assembly (Pyithu Hluttaw): 
  last held 27 May 1990, but Assembly never convened; results - NLD 80%;
  seats - (485 total) NLD 396, the regime-favored NUP 10, other 79; was
  dissolved after the coup of 18 September 1988
Judicial branch: 
  none; Council of People's Justices was abolished after the coup of 18
  September 1988
Political parties and leaders: 
  Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA), leader NA;
  National Unity Party (NUP; proregime), THA KYAW; National League for
  Democracy (NLD), U AUNG SHWE
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma (NCGUB), headed by
  the elected prime minister SEIN WIN (consists of individuals
  legitimately elected to Parliament but not recognized by the military
  regime; the group fled to a border area and joined with insurgents in
  December 1990 to form a parallel government; Kachin Independence Army
  (KIA); United Wa State Army (UWSA); Karen National Union (KNU);
  several Shan factions, including the Mong Tai Army (MTA); All Burma
  Student Democratic Front (ABSDF)
Member of: 
  AsDB, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador U THAUNG 
chancery: 
  2300 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-9044 or 9045 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Deputy Chief of Mission, Charge d'Affaires Franklin P.
  HUDDLE, Jr. 
embassy: 
  581 Merchant Street, Rangoon 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy, Box B, APO AP 96546 
telephone: 
  [95] (1) 82055, 82181 
FAX: 
  [95] (1) 80409 
Flag: 
  red with a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side corner bearing, all
  in white, 14 five-pointed stars encircling a cogwheel containing a
  stalk of rice; the 14 stars represent the 14 administrative divisions

@Burma, Economy

Overview: 
  Burma has a mixed economy with about 70% private activity, mainly in
  agriculture, light industry, and transport, and with about 30%
  state-controlled activity, mainly in energy, heavy industry, and
  foreign trade. Government policy in the last five years, 1989-93, has
  aimed at revitalizing the economy after four decades of tight central
  planning. Thus, private activity has markedly increased; foreign
  investment has been encouraged, so far with moderate success; and
  efforts continue to increase the efficiency of state enterprises.
  Published estimates of Burma's foreign trade are greatly understated
  because of the volume of black market trade. A major ongoing problem
  is the failure to achieve monetary and fiscal stability. Inflation has
  been running at 25% to 30% annually. Good weather helped boost GDP by
  perhaps 5% in 1993. Although Burma remains a poor Asian country, its
  rich resources furnish the potential for substantial long-term
  increases in income, exports, and living standards.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $41 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $950 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  30% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $8.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $11.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $613.4 million (FY93)
commodities: 
  pulses and beans, teak, rice, hardwood
partners: 
  Singapore, China, Thailand, India, Hong Kong
Imports: 
  $1.02 billion (FY93)
commodities: 
  machinery, transport equipment, chemicals, food products
partners: 
  Japan, China, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia
External debt: 
  $4 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.9% (FY93 est.); accounts for 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,100,000 kW
production: 
  2.8 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  65 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  agricultural processing; textiles and footwear; wood and wood
  products; petroleum refining; mining of copper, tin, tungsten, iron;
  construction materials; pharmaceuticals; fertilizer
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 40% of GDP and 66% of employment (including fish and
  forestry); self-sufficient in food; principal crops - paddy rice,
  corn, oilseed, sugarcane, pulses; world's largest stand of hardwood
  trees; rice and timber account for 55% of export revenues
Illicit drugs: 
  world's largest illicit producer of opium (2,575 metric tons in 1993)
  and minor producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; opium
  production has doubled since the collapse of Rangoon's antinarcotic
  programs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $158 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $3.9
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89),  $424 million 
Currency: 
  1 kyat (K) = 100 pyas
Exchange rates: 
  kyats (K) per US$1 - 6.2301 (December 1993), 6.1570 (1993), 6.1045
  (1992), 6.2837 (1991), 6.3386 (1990), 6.7049 (1989); unofficial - 105
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Burma, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,991 km total, all government owned; 3,878 km 1.000-meter gauge, 113
  km narrow-gauge industrial lines; 362 km double track
Highways: 
total: 
  27,000 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 3,200 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 17,700 km; unimproved earth 6,100 km 
Inland waterways: 
  12,800 km; 3,200 km navigable by large commercial vessels
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,343 km; natural gas 330 km 
Ports: 
  Rangoon, Moulmein, Bassein
Merchant marine: 
  47 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 665,628 GRT/941,512 DWT, bulk
  15, cargo 15, chemical 1, combination bulk 1, combination ore/oil 1,
  container 2, oil tanker 2, passenger-cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 5,
  vehicle carrier 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  83 
usable: 
  78 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  24 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  38 
Telecommunications: 
  meets minimum requirements for local and intercity service for
  business and government; international service is good; 53,000
  telephones (1986); radiobroadcast coverage is limited to the most
  populous areas; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV (1985); 1 Indian
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Burma, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 11,199,531; females age 15-49 11,273,643; males fit
  for military service 5,979,710; females fit for military service
  6,034,810; males reach military age (18) annually 445,933 (1994 est.);
  females reach military age (18) annually 430,738 (1994 est.); both
  sexes liable for military service
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Burundi, Geography

Location: 
  Central Africa, between Tanzania and Zaire
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  27,830 sq km 
land area: 
  25,650 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 974 km, Rwanda 290 km, Tanzania 451 km, Zaire 233 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; warm; occasional frost in uplands
Terrain: 
  mostly rolling to hilly highland; some plains
Natural resources: 
  nickel, uranium, rare earth oxide, peat, cobalt, copper, platinum (not
  yet exploited), vanadium 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  43% 
permanent crops: 
  8% 
meadows and pastures: 
  35% 
forest and woodland: 
  2% 
other: 
  12% 
Irrigated land: 
  720 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil exhaustion and erosion; deforestation; habitat loss threatening
  wildlife populations
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  landlocked; straddles crest of the Nile-Congo watershed
Population: 
  6,124,747 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.26% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  44.02 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  21.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  113.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  40.3 years 
male: 
  38.31 years 
female: 
  42.35 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.69 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Burundian(s) 
adjective: 
  Burundi 
Ethnic divisions: 
Africans: 
  Hutu (Bantu) 85%, Tutsi (Hamitic) 14%, Twa (Pygmy) 1% (other Africans
  include about 70,000 refugees, mostly Rwandans and Zairians)
non-Africans: 
  Europeans 3,000, South Asians 2,000
Religions: 
  Christian 67% (Roman Catholic 62%, Protestant 5%), indigenous beliefs
  32%, Muslim 1% 
Languages: 
  Kirundi (official), French (official), Swahili (along Lake Tanganyika
  and in the Bujumbura area)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  50% 
male: 
  61% 
female: 
  40% 
Labor force: 
  1.9 million (1983 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 93.0%, government 4.0%, industry and commerce 1.5%,
  services 1.5%
note: 
  52% of population of working age (1985)

@Burundi, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Burundi 
conventional short form: 
  Burundi 
local long form: 
  Republika y'u Burundi 
local short form: 
  Burundi 
Digraph: 
  BY
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Bujumbura 
Administrative divisions: 
  15 provinces; Bubanza, Bujumbura, Bururi, Cankuzo, Cibitoke, Gitega,
  Karuzi, Kayanza, Kirundo, Makamba, Muramvya, Muyinga, Ngozi, Rutana,
  Ruyigi
Independence: 
  1 July 1962 (from UN trusteeship under Belgian administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 July (1962) 
Constitution: 
  13 March 1992; provides for establishment of a plural political system
Legal system: 
  based on German and Belgian civil codes and customary law; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Interim President Sylvestre NTIBANTUNGANYA, Speaker of the National
  Assembly, succeeded deceased President NTARYAMIRA in early April 1994
  with a mandate for at least 90 days; on 11 July 1994 the mandate was
  extended by the Constitutional Court for three more months at the
  request of 12 political parties locked in negotiations on a new
  broad-based government; elections will be held later in 1994
note: 
  President Melchior NDADAYE died in the military coup of 21 October
  1993 and was succeeded on 5 February 1994 by President Cyprien
  NTARYAMIRA, who was killed in a mysterious airplane explosion on 6
  April 1994
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Anatole KANYENKIKO (since 7 February 1994); chosen by
  the president 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers ; appointed by prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 29 June 1993 (next to be held NA): results -
  FRODEBU 71%, UPRONA 21.4%; seats - (81 total) FRODIBU 65, UPRONA 16;
  other parties won too small shares of the vote to win seats in the
  assembly
note: 
  The National Unity Charter outlining the principles for constitutional
  government was adopted by a national referendum on 5 February 1991
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Unity for National Progress (UPRONA); Burundi Democratic Front
  (FRODEBU); Organization of the People of Burundi (RBP); Socialist
  Party of Burundi (PSB); People's Reconciliation Party (PRP)
Other political or pressure groups: 
  opposition parties legalized in March 1992; Burundi African Alliance
  for the Salvation (ABASA); Rally for Democracy and Economic and Social
  Development (RADDES)
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC, CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jacques BACAMURWANKO, designated (January 1994) 
chancery: 
  Suite 212, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 342-2574 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Leonard J. LANGE 
embassy: 
  Avenue des Etats-Unis, Bujumbura 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 34, 1720, Bujumbura 
telephone: 
  [257] (223) 454 
FAX: 
  [257] (222) 926 
Flag: 
  divided by a white diagonal cross into red panels (top and bottom) and
  green panels (hoist side and outer side) with a white disk
  superimposed at the center bearing three red six-pointed stars
  outlined in green arranged in a triangular design (one star above, two
  stars below)

@Burundi, Economy

Overview: 
  A landlocked, resource-poor country in an early stage of economic
  development, Burundi is predominately agricultural with only a few
  basic industries. Its economic health depends on the coffee crop,
  which accounts for 80% of foreign exchange earnings. The ability to
  pay for imports therefore continues to rest largely on the vagaries of
  the climate and the international coffee market. As part of its
  economic reform agenda, launched in February 1991 with IMF and World
  Bank support, Burundi is trying to diversify its agricultural exports
  and attract foreign investment in industry. Several state-owned coffee
  companies were privatized via public auction in September 1991.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $4.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -3.8% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.7% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $318 million 
expenditures: 
  $326 million, including capital expenditures of $150 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $40.8 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  coffee 81%, tea, cotton, hides, and skins
partners: 
  EC 57%, US 19%, Asia 1%
Imports: 
  $188 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  capital goods 31%, petroleum products 15%, foodstuffs, consumer goods
partners: 
  EC 45%, Asia 29%, US 2%
External debt: 
  $970 million (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 11% (1991 est.); accounts for about 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  55,000 kW
production: 
  105 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  20 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  light consumer goods such as blankets, shoes, soap; assembly of
  imported components; public works construction; food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 50% of GDP; 90% of population dependent on subsistence
  farming; marginally self-sufficient in food production; cash crops -
  coffee, cotton, tea; food crops - corn, sorghum, sweet potatoes,
  bananas, manioc; livestock - meat, milk, hides and skins
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $71 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $10.2
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $32 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $175 million 
Currency: 
  1 Burundi franc (FBu) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Burundi francs (FBu) per US$1 - 247.94 (November 1993), 208.30 (1992),
  181.51 (1991), 171.26 (1990), 158.67 (1989), 140.40 (1988)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Burundi, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  6,285 km 
paved: 
  1,099 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 2,500 km; improved, unimproved earth 2,686 km
  (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  Lake Tanganyika
Ports: 
  Bujumbura (lake port) connects to transportation systems of Tanzania
  and Zaire
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  sparse system of wire, radiocommunications, and low-capacity microwave
  radio relay links; 8,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 2 FM,
  1 TV; 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Burundi, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (includes naval and air units), paramilitary Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,315,660; fit for military service 687,474; reach
  military age (16) annually 67,949 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $28 million, 3.7% of GDP (1989)


@Cambodia, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand, between Thailand
  and Vietnam
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  181,040 sq km 
land area: 
  176,520 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Oklahoma
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,572 km, Laos 541 km, Thailand 803 km, Vietnam 1,228 km 
Coastline: 
  443 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  offshore islands and sections of the boundary with Vietnam are in
  dispute; maritime boundary with Vietnam not defined; parts of border
  with Thailand in dispute; maritime boundary with Thailand not clearly
  defined
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy, monsoon season (May to October); dry season (December
  to March); little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  mostly low, flat plains; mountains in southwest and north
Natural resources: 
  timber, gemstones, some iron ore, manganese, phosphates, hydropower
  potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  16% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  76% 
other: 
  4% 
Irrigated land: 
  920 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation resulting in habitat loss and declining biodiversity (in
  particular, destruction of mangrove swamps threatens natural
  fisheries)
natural hazards: 
  monsoonal rains (June to November)
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Life Conservation; signed, but not ratified -
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping
Note: 
  a land of paddies and forests dominated by the Mekong River and Tonle
  Sap

@Cambodia, People

Population: 
  10,264,628 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.87% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.09 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  16.36 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  110.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  49.26 years 
male: 
  47.8 years 
female: 
  50.8 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.81 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cambodian(s) 
adjective: 
  Cambodian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Khmer 90%, Vietnamese 5%, Chinese 1%, other 4% 
Religions: 
  Theravada Buddhism 95%, other 5% 
Languages: 
  Khmer (official), French 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  35% 
male: 
  48% 
female: 
  22% 
Labor force: 
  2.5 million to 3 million
by occupation: 
  agriculture 80% (1988 est.)

@Cambodia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Cambodia 
conventional short form: 
  Cambodia 
local long form: 
  Reacheanachak Kampuchea 
local short form: 
  Kampuchea 
Digraph: 
  CB
Type: 
  multiparty liberal democracy under a constitutional monarchy
  established in September 1993  
Capital: 
  Phnom Penh 
Administrative divisions: 
  20 provinces (khet, singular and plural); Banteay Meanchey,
  Batdambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Spoe, Kampong Thum,
  Kampot, Kandal, Kaoh Kong, Kracheh, Mondol Kiri, Phnum Penh,
  Pouthisat, Preah Vihear, Prey Veng, Rotanokiri, Siemreab-Otdar
  Meanchey, Stoeng Treng, Svay Rieng, Takev
Independence: 
  9 November 1949 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 9 November 1949 
Constitution: 
  promulgated September 1993
Legal system: 
  currently being defined
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King Norodom SIHANOUK (reinstated NA September 1993) 
head of government: 
  power shared between First Prime Minister Prince Norodom RANARIDDH and
  Second Prime Minister HUN SEN 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; elected by the National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral; a 120-member constituent assembly based on proportional
  representation within each province was establised following the
  UN-supervised election in May 1993; the constituent assembly was
  transformed into a legislature in September 1993 after delegates
  promulgated the constitution
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court established under the constitution has not yet been
  established and the future judicial system is yet to be defined by law
Political parties and leaders: 
  National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and
  Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC) under Prince NORODOM RANARIDDH;
  Cambodian Pracheachon Party or Cambodian People's Party (CPP) under
  CHEA SIM; Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party under SON SANN; Democratic
  Kampuchea (DK, also known as the Khmer Rouge) under KHIEU SAMPHAN
Member of: 
  ACCT (observer), AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IFAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Ambassador SISOWATH SIRIRATH represents Cambodia at the United Nations
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Charles H. TWINING 
embassy: 
  27 EO Street 240, Phnom Penh 
mailing address: 
  Box P, APO AP 96546 
telephone: 
  (855) 23-26436 or (855) 23-26438 
FAX: 
  (855) 23-26437 
Flag: 
  horizontal band of red separates two equal horizontal bands of blue
  with a white three-towered temple representing Angkor Wat in the
  center

@Cambodia, Economy

Overview: 
  The Cambodian economy - virtually destroyed by decades of war - is
  slowly recovering. Government leaders are moving toward restoring
  fiscal and monetary discipline and have established good working
  relations with international financial institutions. Despite such
  positive developments, the reconstruction effort faces many tough
  challenges. Rural Cambodia, where 90% of almost ten million Khmer
  live, remains mired in poverty. The almost total lack of basic
  infrastructure in the countryside will hinder development and will
  contribute to a growing imbalance in growth between urban and rural
  areas over the near term. Moreover, the new government's lack of
  experience in administering economic and technical assistance
  programs, and rampant corruption among officials, will slow the growth
  of critical public sector investment. Inflation for 1993 as a whole
  was 60%, less than a quarter of the 1992 rate, and was declining
  during the year. The government hoped the rate would fall to 10% in
  early 1994.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent -  $6 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  60% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $350 million 
expenditures: 
  $350 million, including capital expenditures of $133 million (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $70 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  natural rubber, rice, pepper, raw timber
partners: 
  Thailand, Japan, India, Singapore, Malaysia, China, Vietnam
Imports: 
  $360 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  international food aid; fuels, consumer goods, machinery
partners: 
  Japan, India, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, China, Vietnam
External debt: 
  total outstanding bilateral official debt to OECD members $248 million
  (yearend 1991), plus 840 million ruble debt to former CEMA countries
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 15.6% (year NA); accounts for 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  35,000 kW
production: 
  70 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  9 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  rice milling, fishing, wood and wood products, rubber, cement, gem
  mining
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 50% of GDP; mainly subsistence farming except for rubber
  plantations; main crops - rice, rubber, corn; food shortages - rice,
  meat, vegetables, dairy products, sugar, flour
Illicit drugs: 
  secondary transshipment country for heroin produced in the Golden
  Triangle
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $725 million; Western
  (non-US countries) (1970-89), $300 million; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $1.8 billion; donor countries and multilateral institutions
  pledged $880 million in assistance in 1992
Currency: 
  1 new riel (CR) = 100 sen
Exchange rates: 
  riels (CR) per US$1 - 2,390 (December 1993), 2,800 (September 1992),
  500 (December 1991), 560 (1990), 159.00 (1988), 100.00 (1987)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Cambodia, Communications

Railroads: 
  612 km 1.000-meter gauge, government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  13,351 km (some roads in serious disrepair)
paved: 
  bituminous 2,622 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel, or improved earth 7,105 km; unimproved earth
  3,624 km 
Inland waterways: 
  3,700 km navigable all year to craft drawing 0.6 meters; 282 km
  navigable to craft drawing 1.8 meters
Ports: 
  Kampong Saom, Phnom Penh
Airports: 
total: 
  20 
usable: 
  13 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  8 
Telecommunications: 
  service barely adequate for government requirements and virtually
  nonexistent for general public; international service limited to
  Vietnam and other adjacent countries; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no
  FM, 1 TV

@Cambodia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
Khmer Royal Armed Forces (KRAF): 
  created in 1993 by the merger of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces
  and the two non-Communist resistance armies; note - the KRAF is also
  known as the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF)
Resistance forces: 
  National Army of Democratic Kampuchea (Khmer Rouge) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,182,912; fit for military service 1,217,357; reach
  military age (18) annually 67,463 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Cameroon, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Equatorial
  Guinea and Nigeria
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  475,440 sq km 
land area: 
  469,440 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,591 km, Central African Republic 797 km, Chad 1,094 km, Congo
  523 km, Equatorial Guinea 189 km, Gabon 298 km, Nigeria 1,690 km 
Coastline: 
  402 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  50 nm
International disputes: 
  demarcation of international boundaries in Lake Chad, the lack of
  which has led to border incidents in the past, is completed and
  awaiting ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria; boundary
  commission, created with Nigeria to discuss unresolved land and
  maritime boundaries in the vicinity of the Bakasi Peninsula, has not
  yet convened, but a commission was formed in January 1994 to study a
  flare-up of the dispute
Climate: 
  varies with terrain from tropical along coast to semiarid and hot in
  north
Terrain: 
  diverse, with coastal plain in southwest, dissected plateau in center,
  mountains in west, plains in north
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, bauxite, iron ore, timber, hydropower potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  13% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  54% 
other: 
  13% 
Irrigated land: 
  280 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water-borne diseases are prevalent; deforestation; overgrazing;
  desertification; poaching
natural hazards: 
  recent volcanic activity with release of poisonous gases
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  sometimes referred to as the hinge of Africa

@Cameroon, People

Population: 
  13,132,191 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.91% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  40.53 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.41 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  77.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  57.07 years 
male: 
  55.03 years 
female: 
  59.17 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.84 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cameroonian(s) 
adjective: 
  Cameroonian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Cameroon Highlanders 31%, Equatorial Bantu 19%, Kirdi 11%, Fulani 10%,
  Northwestern Bantu 8%, Eastern Nigritic 7%, other African 13%,
  non-African less than 1%
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 51%, Christian 33%, Muslim 16% 
Languages: 
  24 major African language groups, English (official), French
  (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  55% 
male: 
  66% 
female: 
  45% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  agriculture 74.4%, industry and transport 11.4%, other services 14.2%
  (1983)
note: 
  50% of population of working age (15-64 years) (1985)

@Cameroon, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Cameroon 
conventional short form: 
  Cameroon 
former: 
  French Cameroon 
Digraph: 
  CM
Type: 
  unitary republic; multiparty presidential regime (opposition parties
  legalized 1990)
Capital: 
  Yaounde 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 provinces; Adamaoua, Centre, Est, Extreme-Nord, Littoral, Nord,
  Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Ouest
Independence: 
  1 January 1960 (from UN trusteeship under French administration)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 20 May (1972) 
Constitution: 
  20 May 1972
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system, with common law influence; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Paul BIYA (since 6 November 1982); election last held 11
  October 1992; results - President Paul BIYA reelected with about 40%
  of the vote amid widespread allegations of fraud; SDF candidate John
  FRU NDI got 36% of the vote; UNDP candidate Bello Bouba MAIGARI got
  19% of the vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Simon ACHIDI ACHU (since 9 April 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 1 March 1992 (next scheduled for March 1997);
  results - (180 seats) CPDM 88, UNDP 68, UPC 18, MDR 6
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (CPDM), Paul BIYA, president, is
  government-controlled and was formerly the only party, but opposition
  parties were legalized in 1990
major opposition parties: 
  National Union for Democracy and Progress (UNDP); Social Democratic
  Front (SDF); Cameroonian Democratic Union (UDC); Union of Cameroonian
  Populations (UPC)
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-19, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA,
  UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jerome MENDOUGA 
chancery: 
  2349 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-8790 through 8794 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Harriet ISOM 
embassy: 
  Rue Nachtigal, Yaounde 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 817, Yaounde 
telephone: 
  [237] 23-40-14 and 23-05-12 
FAX: 
  [237] 23-07-53 
consulate(s): 
  none  (Douala closed July 1993) 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), red, and yellow with
  a yellow five-pointed star centered in the red band; uses the popular
  pan-African colors of Ethiopia

@Cameroon, Economy

Overview: 
  Because of its offshore oil resources and favorable agricultural
  conditions, Cameroon has one of the best-endowed, most diversified
  primary commodity economies in sub-Saharan Africa. Still, it faces
  many of the serious problems facing other underdeveloped countries,
  such as political instability, a top-heavy civil service, and a
  generally unfavorable climate for business enterprise. The development
  of the oil sector led rapid economic growth between 1970 and 1985.
  Growth came to an abrupt halt in 1986, precipitated by steep declines
  in the prices of major exports: coffee, cocoa, and petroleum. Export
  earnings were cut by almost one-third, and inefficiencies in fiscal
  management were exposed. In 1990-93, with support from the IMF and
  World Bank, the government began to introduce reforms designed to spur
  business investment, increase efficiency in agriculture, and
  recapitalize the nation's banks. Political instability following
  suspect elections in 1992 brought IMF/WB structural adjustment to a
  halt. Although the 50% devaluation of the currency in January 1994
  improves the potential for export growth, mismanagement remains and is
  the main barrier to economic improvement.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $19.1 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3% (1990 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  25% (1990 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.7 billion 
expenditures: 
  $2.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $422 million (FY90
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  petroleum products 51%, coffee, beans, cocoa, aluminum products,
  timber
partners: 
  EC (particularly France) about 50%, US, African countries
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  machines and electrical equipment, food, consumer goods, transport
  equipment
partners: 
  EC about 60% (France 41%, Germany 9%), African countries, Japan, US 4%
External debt: 
  $6 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.4% (FY87); accounts for 30% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  755,000 kW
production: 
  2.19 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  190 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  petroleum production and refining, food processing, light consumer
  goods, textiles, sawmills
Agriculture: 
  the agriculture and forestry sectors provide employment for the
  majority of the population, contributing nearly 25% to GDP and
  providing a high degree of self-sufficiency in staple foods;
  commercial and food crops include coffee, cocoa, timber, cotton,
  rubber, bananas, oilseed, grains, livestock, root starches
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $479 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-90), $4.75
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $29 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $125 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Cameroon, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,003 km total; 858 km 1.000-meter gauge, 145 km 0.600-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  65,000 km 
paved: 
  2,682 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 32,318 km; unimproved earth 30,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  2,090 km; of decreasing importance
Ports: 
  Douala
Merchant marine: 
  2 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 24,122 GRT/33,509 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  61 
usable: 
  49 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  21 
Telecommunications: 
  good system of open wire, cable, troposcatter, and microwave radio
  relay; 26,000 telephones, 2 telephones per 1,000 persons, available
  only to business and government; broadcast stations - 11 AM, 11 FM, 1
  TV; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@Cameroon, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Naval Infantry), Air Force, National
  Gendarmerie, Presidential Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,939,761; fit for military service 1,481,750; reach
  military age (18) annually 137,020 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $219 million, less than 2% of GDP (1990
  est.)


@Canada, Geography

Location: 
  Northern North America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and North
  Pacific Ocean north of the US
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, North America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  9,976,140 sq km 
land area: 
  9,220,970 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than US
Land boundaries: 
  total 8,893 km, US 8,893 km (includes 2,477 km with Alaska)
Coastline: 
  243,791 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary disputes with the US; Saint Pierre and Miquelon is
  focus of maritime boundary dispute between Canada and France
Climate: 
  varies from temperate in south to subarctic and arctic in north
Terrain: 
  mostly plains with mountains in west and lowlands in southeast
Natural resources: 
  nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, potash, silver, fish,
  timber, wildlife, coal, petroleum, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  35% 
other: 
  57% 
Irrigated land: 
  8,400 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  acid rain severely affecting lakes and damaging forests; metal
  smelting, coal-burning utilities, and vehicle emissions impacting on
  agricultural and forest productivity; ocean waters becoming
  contaminated due to agricultural, industrial, mining, and forestry
  activities
natural hazards: 
  continuous permafrost in north is a serious obstacle to development
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  second-largest country in world (after Russia); strategic location
  between Russia and US via north polar route; nearly 90% of the
  population is concentrated in the region near the US/Canada border

@Canada, People

Population: 
  28,113,997 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.18% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.1 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.39 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  5.11 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.13 years 
male: 
  74.73 years 
female: 
  81.71 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.84 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Canadian(s) 
adjective: 
  Canadian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  British Isles origin 40%, French origin 27%, other European 20%,
  indigenous Indian and Eskimo 1.5% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 46%, United Church 16%, Anglican 10%, other 28% 
Languages: 
  English (official), French (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1986)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  13.38 million 
by occupation: 
  services 75%, manufacturing 14%, agriculture 4%, construction 3%,
  other 4% (1988)

@Canada, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Canada 
Digraph: 
  CA
Type: 
  confederation with parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Ottawa 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 provinces and 2 territories*; Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba,
  New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Northwest Territories*, Nova Scotia,
  Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, Saskatchewan, Yukon Territory*
Independence: 
  1 July 1867 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Canada Day, 1 July (1867) 
Constitution: 
  amended British North America Act 1867 patriated to Canada 17 April
  1982; charter of rights and unwritten customs
Legal system: 
  based on English common law, except in Quebec, where civil law system
  based on French law prevails; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
  with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Raymond John HNATYSHYN (since 29 January 1990) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Jean CHRETIEN (since 4 November 1993) was elected on 25
  October 1993, replacing Kim CAMBELL; Deputy Prime Minister Sheila
  COPPS 
cabinet: 
  Federal Ministry; chosen by the prime minister from members of his own
  party sitting in Parliament
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Parlement)
Senate (Senat): 
  consisting of a body whose members are appointed to serve until 75
  years of age by the governor general and selected on the advice of the
  prime minister; its normal limit 104 senators
House of Commons (Chambre des Communes): 
  elections last held 25 October 1993 (next to be held by NA October
  1998); results - number of votes by percent NA; seats - (295 total)
  Liberal Party 178, Bloc Quebecois 54, Reform Party 52, New Democratic
  Party 8, Progressive Conservative Party 2, independents 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Liberal Party, Jean CHRETIEN; Bloc Quebecois, Lucien BOUCHARD; Reform
  Party, Preston MANNING; New Democratic Party, Audrey McLAUGHLIN;
  Progressive Conservative Party, Jean CHAREST
Member of: 
  ACCT, AfDB, AG (observer), APEC, AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC,
  CDB (non-regional), COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, ESA (cooperating
  state), FAO, G-7, G-8, G-10, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA,
  NSG, OAS, OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO,
  UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMOZ, UNOMUR, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UNTSO,
  UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WIPO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Raymond CHRETIEN 
chancery: 
  501 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20001 
telephone: 
  (202) 682-1740 
FAX: 
  (202) 682-7726 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, Dallas, Detroit, Los Angeles,
  Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, and Seattle 
consulate(s): 
  Cincinnati, Cleveland, Miami, Pittsburg, Princeton, San Diego, San
  Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador James Johnston BLANCHARD 
embassy: 
  100 Wellington Street, K1P 5T1, Ottawa 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 5000, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-0430 
telephone: 
  (613) 238-5335 or 4470 
FAX: 
  (613) 238-5720 
consulate(s) general: 
  Calgary, Halifax, Montreal, Quebec, Toronto, and Vancouver 
Flag: 
  three vertical bands of red (hoist side), white (double width,
  square), and red with a red maple leaf centered in the white band

@Canada, Economy

Overview: 
  As an affluent, high-tech industrial society, Canada today closely
  resembles the US in per capita output, market-oriented economic
  system, and pattern of production. Since World War II the impressive
  growth of the manufacturing, mining, and service sectors has
  transformed the nation from a largely rural economy into one primarily
  industrial and urban. In the 1980s, Canada registered one of the
  highest rates of real growth among the OECD nations, averaging about
  3.2%. With its great natural resources, skilled labor force, and
  modern capital plant, Canada has excellent economic prospects,
  although the country still faces high unemployment and a growing debt.
  Moreover, the continuing constitutional impasse between English- and
  French-speaking areas has observers discussing a possible split in the
  confederation; foreign investors have become edgy.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $617.7 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.4% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $22,200 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.9% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  11% (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $92.34 billion (Federal)
expenditures: 
  $123.04 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY93 est.)
Exports: 
  $133.9 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  newsprint, wood pulp, timber, crude petroleum, machinery, natural gas,
  aluminum, motor vehicles and parts; telecommunications equipment
partners: 
  US, Japan, UK, Germany, South Korea, Netherlands, China
Imports: 
  $125.3 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  crude oil, chemicals, motor vehicles and parts, durable consumer
  goods, electronic computers; telecommunications equipment and parts
partners: 
  US, Japan, UK, Germany, France, Mexico, Taiwan, South Korea
External debt: 
  $435 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.5% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  109,340,000 kW
production: 
  493 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  17,900 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  processed and unprocessed minerals, food products, wood and paper
  products, transportation equipment, chemicals, fish products,
  petroleum and natural gas
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 3% of GDP; one of the world's major producers and
  exporters of grain (wheat and barley); key source of US agricultural
  imports; large forest resources cover 35% of total land area;
  commercial fisheries provide annual catch of 1.5 million metric tons,
  of which 75% is exported
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic drug market; use of
  hydroponics technology permits growers to plant large quantities of
  high-quality marijuana indoors; growing role as a transit point for
  heroin and cocaine entering the US market
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $7.2 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Canadian dollar (Can$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Canadian dollars (Can$) per US$1 - 1.3174 (January 1994), 1.2901
  (1993), 1.2087 (1992), 1.1457 (1991), 1.1668 (1990), 1.1840 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Canada, Communications

Railroads: 
  146,444 km total; two major transcontinental freight railway systems -
  Canadian National (government owned) and Canadian Pacific Railway;
  passenger service - VIA (government operated); 158 km is electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  884,272 km 
paved: 
  250,023 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 462,913 km; earth 171,336 km 
Inland waterways: 
  3,000 km, including Saint Lawrence Seaway
Pipelines: 
  crude and refined oil 23,564 km; natural gas 74,980 km 
Ports: 
  Halifax, Montreal, Quebec, Saint John (New Brunswick), Saint John's
  (Newfoundland), Toronto, Vancouver
Merchant marine: 
  59 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 448,357 GRT/639,319 DWT, bulk 9,
  cargo 8, chemical tanker 4, container 1, oil tanker 22, passenger 1,
  passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6,
  short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 2 
note: 
  does not include ships used exclusively in the Great Lakes
Airports: 
total: 
  1,356 
usable: 
  1,107 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  458 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  29 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  326 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent service provided by modern media; 18.0 million telephones;
  broadcast stations - 900 AM, 29 FM, 53 (1,400 repeaters) TV; 5 coaxial
  submarine cables; over 300 earth stations operating in INTELSAT
  (including 4 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean) and domestic systems

@Canada, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Canadian Armed Forces (including Land Forces Command, Maritime
  Command, Air Command, Communications Command, Training Command), Royal
  Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 7,508,590; fit for military service 6,482,267; reach
  military age (17) annually 191,850 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $10.3 billion, 1.9% of GDP (FY93/94)


@Cape Verde, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, in the southeastern North Atlantic Ocean, 500 km west
  of Senegal in Western Africa
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  4,030 sq km 
land area: 
  4,030 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Rhode Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  965 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; warm, dry, summer; precipitation very erratic
Terrain: 
  steep, rugged, rocky, volcanic
Natural resources: 
  salt, basalt rock, pozzolana, limestone, kaolin, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  9% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  85% 
Irrigated land: 
  20 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; overgrazing; desertification
natural hazards: 
  subject to prolonged droughts; harmattan wind can obscure visibility;
  volcanically and seismically active
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change
Note: 
  strategic location 500 km from west coast of Africa near major
  north-south sea routes; important communications station; important
  sea and air refueling site

@Cape Verde, People

Population: 
  423,120 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.01% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  46.23 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.04 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -7.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  57.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  62.59 years 
male: 
  60.7 years 
female: 
  64.58 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.32 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cape Verdean(s) 
adjective: 
  Cape Verdean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Creole (mulatto) 71%, African 28%, European 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholicism fused with indigenous beliefs 
Languages: 
  Portuguese, Crioulo, a blend of Portuguese and West African words
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1989)
total population: 
  66% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  102,000 (1985 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture (mostly subsistence) 57%, services 29%, industry 14%
  (1981)
note: 
  51% of population of working age (1985)

@Cape Verde, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Cape Verde 
conventional short form: 
  Cape Verde 
local long form: 
  Republica de Cabo Verde 
local short form: 
  Cabo Verde 
Digraph: 
  CV
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Praia 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 districts (concelhos, singular - concelho); Boa Vista, Brava, Fogo,
  Maio, Paul, Praia, Porto Novo, Ribeira Grande, Sal, Santa Catarina,
  Santa Cruz, Sao Nicolau, Sao Vicente, Tarrafal
Independence: 
  5 July 1975 (from Portugal)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 5 July (1975) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution came into force 25 September 1992
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro (since 22 March 1991) election
  last held 17 February 1991 (next to be held February 1996); results -
  Antonio Monteiro MASCARENHAS (independent) received 72.6% of vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Carlos Alberto Wahnon de Carvalho VEIGA (since 13
  January 1991); 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by prime minister from members of the
  Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
People's National Assembly (Assembleia Nacional Popular): 
  elections last held 13 January 1991 (next to be held January 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (79 total) MPD 56,
  PAICV 23; note - this multiparty Assembly election ended 15 years of
  single-party rule
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Tribunal of Justice (Supremo Tribunal de Justia) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Movement for Democracy (MPD), Prime Minister Carlos VEIGA, founder and
  chairman; African Party for Independence of Cape Verde (PAICV), Pedro
  Verona Rodrigues PIRES, chairman
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOM (observer), ITU, LORCS,
  NAM, OAU, UN (Cape Verde assumed a nonpermanent seat on the Security
  Council on 1 January 1992), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMOZ, UPU, WCL,
  WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Carlos Alberto Santos SILVA 
chancery: 
  3415 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 965-6820 
FAX: 
  (202) 965-1207 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Joseph M. SEGARS 
embassy: 
  Rua Hoji Ya Henda 81, Praia 
mailing address: 
  C. P. 201, Praia 
telephone: 
  [238] 61-56-16 or 61-56-17 
FAX: 
  [238] 61-13-55 
Flag: 
  three horozontal bands of light blue (top, double width), white (with
  a horozontal red stripe in the middle third), and light blue; a circle
  of 10 yellow five pointed stars is centered on the hoist end of the
  red stripe and extends into the upper and lower blue bands

@Cape Verde, Economy

Overview: 
  Cape Verde's low per capita GDP reflects a poor natural resource base,
  a serious, long-term drought, and a high birthrate. The economy is
  service oriented, with commerce, transport, and public services
  accounting for 60% of GDP. Although nearly 70% of the population lives
  in rural areas, agriculture's share of GDP is only 20%; the fishing
  sector accounts for 4%. About 90% of food must be imported. The
  fishing potential, mostly lobster and tuna, is not fully exploited. In
  1988 fishing represented only 3.5% of GDP. Cape Verde annually runs a
  high trade deficit, financed by remittances from emigrants and foreign
  aid. Economic reforms launched by the new democratic government in
  February 1991 are aimed at developing the private sector and
  attracting foreign investment to diversify the economy.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $415 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.3% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,070 (1991)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  8.7% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  25% (1988)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $104 million 
expenditures: 
  $133 million, including capital expenditures of $72 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $6 million (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  fish, bananas, hides and skins
partners: 
  Portugal 40%, Algeria 31%, Angola, Netherlands (1990 est.)
Imports: 
  $145 million (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, consumer goods, industrial products, transport equipment
partners: 
  Sweden 33%, Spain 11%, Germany 5%, Portugal 3%, France 3%,
  Netherlands, US (1990 est.)
External debt: 
  $156 million (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 18% (1988 est.); accounts for 7% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  15,000 kW
production: 
  15 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  40 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  fish processing, salt mining, clothing factories, ship repair,
  construction materials, food and beverage production
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 20% of GDP (including fishing); largely subsistence
  farming; bananas are the only export crop; other crops - corn, beans,
  sweet potatoes, coffee; growth potential of agricultural sector
  limited by poor soils and scanty rainfall; annual food imports
  required; fish catch provides for both domestic consumption and small
  exports
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY75-90), $93 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-90), $586
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $12 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $36 million 
Currency: 
  1 Cape Verdean escudo (CVEsc) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Cape Verdean escudos (CVEsc) per US$1 - 85.992 (December 1993), 80.574
  (1993), 68.018 (1992), 71.408 (1991), 70.031 (1990), 77.978 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Cape Verde, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Mindelo, Praia
Merchant marine: 
  7 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,717 GRT/19,000 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  6 
usable: 
  6 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  interisland microwave radio relay system, high-frequency radio to
  Senegal and Guinea-Bissau; over 1,700 telephones; broadcast stations -
  1 AM, 6 FM, 1 TV; 2 coaxial submarine cables; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Cape Verde, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  People's Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARP) (including Army and Navy),
  Security Service 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 78,153; fit for military service 45,804 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Cayman Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Cayman Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the northwestern Caribbean Sea, nearly halfway between
  Cuba and Honduras
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  260 sq km 
land area: 
  260 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  160 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; warm, rainy summers (May to October) and cool,
  relatively dry winters (November to April)
Terrain: 
  low-lying limestone base surrounded by coral reefs
Natural resources: 
  fish, climate and beaches that foster tourism 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  8% 
forest and woodland: 
  23% 
other: 
  69% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  important location between Cuba and Central America

@Cayman Islands, People

Population: 
  31,790 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  4.33% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.06 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.98 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  33.2 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.1 years 
male: 
  75.37 years 
female: 
  78.81 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.46 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Caymanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Caymanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mixed 40%, white 20%, black 20%, expatriates of various ethnic groups
  20% 
Religions: 
  United Church (Presbyterian and Congregational), Anglican, Baptist,
  Roman Catholic, Church of God, other Protestant denominations 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  8,061 
by occupation: 
  service workers 18.7%, clerical 18.6%, construction 12.5%, finance and
  investment 6.7%, directors and business managers 5.9% (1979)

@Cayman Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Cayman Islands 
Digraph: 
  CJ
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  George Town 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 districts; Creek, Eastern, Midland, South Town, Spot Bay, Stake Bay,
  West End, Western
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Constitution Day (first Monday in July) 
Constitution: 
  1959, revised 1972 and 1992
Legal system: 
  British common law and local statutes
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Governor and President of the Executive Council Michael GORE (since 15
  September 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; 3 members are appointed by the governor, 4 members
  elected by the Legislative Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly: 
  election last held November 1992 (next to be held November 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (15 total, 12 elected)
Judicial branch: 
  Grand Court, Cayman Islands Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  no formal political parties
Member of: 
  CARICOM (observer), CDB, INTERPOL (subbureau), IOC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Caymanian coat of arms on a white disk centered on the outer half of
  the flag; the coat of arms includes a pineapple and turtle above a
  shield with three stars (representing the three islands) and a scroll
  at the bottom bearing the motto HE HATH FOUNDED IT UPON THE SEAS

@Cayman Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy depends heavily on tourism (70% of GDP and 75% of foreign
  currency earnings) and offshore financial services, with the tourist
  industry aimed at the luxury market and catering mainly to visitors
  from North America. About 90% of the islands' food and consumer goods
  needs must be imported. The Caymanians enjoy one of the highest
  standards of living in the region.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $670 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.4% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $23,000 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.5% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  7% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $141.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $160.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991)
Exports: 
  $2.6 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  turtle products, manufactured consumer goods
partners: 
  mostly US
Imports: 
  $262.2 million (c.i.f., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods
partners: 
  US, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, Netherlands Antilles, Japan
External debt: 
  $15 million (1986)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  74,000 kW
production: 
  256 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,780 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, banking, insurance and finance, construction, building
  materials, furniture making
Agriculture: 
  minor production of vegetables, fruit, livestock; turtle farming
Illicit drugs: 
  a major money-laundering center for illicit drug profits;
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $26.7 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),  $35
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Caymanian dollar (CI$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Caymanian dollars (CI$) per US$1 - 0.85 (22 November 1993)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Cayman Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  160 km (main roads)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  George Town, Cayman Brac
Merchant marine: 
  30 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 368,037 GRT/581,060 DWT, bulk 9,
  cargo 8, chemical tanker 2, oil tanker 3, passenger-cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 7 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  35,000 telephones; telephone system uses 1 submarine coaxial cable and
  1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station to link islands and access
  international services; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 1 FM, no TV

@Cayman Islands, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Cayman Islands Police Force (RCIPF) 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Central African Republic, Geography

Location: 
  Central Africa, between Chad and Zaire
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  622,980 sq km 
land area: 
  622,980 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,203 km, Cameroon 797 km, Chad 1,197 km, Congo 467 km, Sudan
  1,165 km, Zaire 1,577 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, dry winters; mild to hot, wet summers
Terrain: 
  vast, flat to rolling, monotonous plateau; scattered hills in
  northeast and southwest
Natural resources: 
  diamonds, uranium, timber, gold, oil 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  64% 
other: 
  28% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  poaching has diminished reputation as one of last great wildlife
  refuges; desertification
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dusty harmattan winds affect northern areas
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; almost the precise center of Africa
Population: 
  3,142,182 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.16% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  42.3 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  20.69 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  137.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  42.54 years 
male: 
  41.07 years 
female: 
  44.06 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.42 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Central African(s) 
adjective: 
  Central African 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Baya 34%, Banda 27%, Sara 10%, Mandjia 21%, Mboum 4%, M'Baka 4%,
  Europeans 6,500 (including 3,600 French)
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 24%, Protestant 25%, Roman Catholic 25%, Muslim
  15%, other 11% 
note: 
  animistic beliefs and practices strongly influence the Christian
  majority
Languages: 
  French (official), Sangho (lingua franca and national language),
  Arabic, Hunsa, Swahili 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  27% 
male: 
  33% 
female: 
  15% 
Labor force: 
  775,413 (1986 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 85%, commerce and services 9%, industry 3%, government 3%
note: 
  about 64,000 salaried workers; 55% of population of working age (1985)

@Central African Republic, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Central African Republic 
conventional short form: 
  none 
local long form: 
  Republique Centrafricaine 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Central African Empire 
Abbreviation: 
  CAR 
Digraph: 
  CT
Type: 
  republic; one-party presidential regime since 1986
Capital: 
  Bangui 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 prefectures (prefectures, singular - prefecture), 2 economic
  prefectures* (prefectures economiques, singular - prefecture
  economique), and 1 commune**; Bamingui-Bangoran, Bangui** Basse-Kotto,
  Gribingui*, Haute-Kotto, Haute-Sangha, Haut-Mbomou, Kemo-Gribingui,
  Lobaye, Mbomou, Nana-Mambere, Ombella-Mpoko, Ouaka, Ouham,
  Ouham-Pende, Sangha*, Vakaga
Independence: 
  13 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 1 December (1958) (proclamation of the republic)
Constitution: 
  21 November 1986
Legal system: 
  based on French law
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Felix (Ange) PATASSE (since 22 October 1993) election last
  held 19 September 1993; PATASSE received 52.45% of the votes and Abel
  GOUMBA received 45.62%; next election schelduled for 1998
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Dr. Jean-Luc MANDABA (since 25 October 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 19 September 1993; results - percentage vote by
  party NA; seats - (85 total) MLPC 33, RDC 14, PLD 7, ADP 6, PSD 3,
  others 22
note: 
  the National Assembly is advised by the Economic and Regional Council
  (Conseil Economique et Regional); when they sit together they are
  called the Congress (Congres)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Movement for the Liberation of the Central African People (MLPC), the
  party of the new president, Ange Felix PATASSE; Central African
  Democratic Party (RDC), Laurent GOMINA-PAMPALI; Council of Moderates
  Coalition includes; Union of the People for Economic and Social
  Development (UPDS), Katossy SIMANI; Liberal Republican Party (PARELI),
  Augustin M'BOE; Central African Socialist Movement (MSCA), Michel
  BENGUE; Concerted Democratic Forces (CFD), a coalition of 13 parties,
  including; Alliance for Democracy and Progress (ADP), Francois PEHOUA;
  Central African Republican party (PRC), Ruth ROLLAND; Social
  Democratic Party (PSD), Enoch DERANT-LAKOUE; Civic Forum (FC), Gen.
  Timothee MALENDOMA; Liberal Democratic Party (PLD), Nestor
  KOMBOT-NAGUEMON; Movement for the Liberation of the Central African
  People (MLPC), Felix (Ange) PATASSE
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT, IBRD,
  ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS,
  NAM, OAU, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Henri KOBA 
chancery: 
  1618 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-7800 or 7801 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Robert E. GRIBBIN 
embassy: 
  Avenue David Dacko, Bangui 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 924, Bangui 
telephone: 
  [236] 61-02-00, 61-25-78, 61-43-33, 61-02-10 
FAX: 
  [236] 61-44-94 
Flag: 
  four equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, green, and yellow
  with a vertical red band in center; there is a yellow five-pointed
  star on the hoist side of the blue band

@Central African Republic, Economy

Overview: 
  Subsistence agriculture, including forestry, remains the backbone of
  the CAR economy, with more than 70% of the population living in the
  countryside. In 1990 the agricultural sector generated about 42% of
  GDP. Timber accounted for about 26% of export earnings and the diamond
  industry for 54%. Important constraints to economic development
  include the CAR's landlocked position, a poor transportation system,
  and a weak human resource base. Multilateral and bilateral development
  assistance, particularly from France, plays a major role in providing
  capital for new investment.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -3% (1990 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  -3% (1990 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  30% (1988 est.) in Bangui
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $175 million 
expenditures: 
  $312 million, including capital expenditures of $122 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $123.5 million (f.o.b.1992)
commodities: 
  diamonds, cotton, coffee, timber, tobacco
partners: 
  France, Belgium, Italy, Japan, US
Imports: 
  $165.1 million (f.o.b.1992)
commodities: 
  food, textiles, petroleum products, machinery, electrical equipment,
  motor vehicles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, consumer goods, industrial
  products
partners: 
  France, other EC countries, Japan, Algeria
External debt: 
  $859 million (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4% (1990 est.); accounts for 14% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  40,000 kW
production: 
  95 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  30 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  diamond mining, sawmills, breweries, textiles, footwear, assembly of
  bicycles and motorcycles
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 42% of GDP; self-sufficient in food production except for
  grain; commercial crops - cotton, coffee, tobacco, timber; food crops
  - manioc, yams, millet, corn, bananas
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $52 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-90), $1.6
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $6 million; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $38 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Central African Republic, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  22,000 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 458 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 10,542 km; unimproved earth 11,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  800 km; traditional trade carried on by means of shallow-draft
  dugouts; Oubangui is the most important river
Airports: 
total: 
  65 
usable: 
  51 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  20 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system; network relies primarily on radio relay links, with
  low-capacity, low-powered radiocommunication also used; broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Central African Republic, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Central African Army (including Republican Guard), Air Force, National
  Gendarmerie, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 701,728; fit for military service 367,264 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $23 million, 1.8% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Chad, Geography

Location: 
  Central Africa, between the Central African Republic and Libya
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.284 million sq km 
land area: 
  1,259,200 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than three times the size of California
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,968 km, Cameroon 1,094 km, Central African Republic 1,197 km,
  Libya 1,055 km, Niger 1,175 km, Nigeria 87 km, Sudan 1,360 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled in February 1994 that
  the 100,000 sq km Aozou Strip between Chad and Libya belongs to Chad,
  and that Libya must withdraw from it by 31 May 1994; Libya had
  withdrawn its forces in response to the ICJ ruling, but as of June
  1994 still maintained an airfield in the disputed area; demarcation of
  international boundaries in Lake Chad, the lack of which has led to
  border incidents in the past, is completed and awaiting ratification
  by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria
Climate: 
  tropical in south, desert in north
Terrain: 
  broad, arid plains in center, desert in north, mountains in northwest,
  lowlands in south
Natural resources: 
  petroleum (unexploited but exploration under way), uranium, natron,
  kaolin, fish (Lake Chad) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  36% 
forest and woodland: 
  11% 
other: 
  51% 
Irrigated land: 
  100 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dusty harmattan winds occur in north; periodic droughts;
  subject to locust plagues
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands; signed, but
  not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping
Note: 
  landlocked; Lake Chad is the most significant water body in the Sahel

@Chad, People

Population: 
  5,466,771 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.15% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  42.12 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  20.59 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  131.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  40.79 years 
male: 
  39.7 years 
female: 
  41.94 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Chadian(s) 
adjective: 
  Chadian 
Ethnic divisions: 
north and center: 
  Muslims (Arabs, Toubou, Hadjerai, Fulbe, Kotoko, Kanembou, Baguirmi,
  Boulala, Zaghawa, and Maba)
south: 
  non-Muslims (Sara, Ngambaye, Mbaye, Goulaye, Moundang, Moussei, Massa)
  nonindigenous 150,000, of whom 1,000 are French
Religions: 
  Muslim 50%, Christian 25%, indigenous beliefs, animism 25% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Arabic (official), Sara (in south), Sango (in
  south), more than 100 different languages and dialects are spoken
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write French or Arabic (1990 est.)
total population: 
  30% 
male: 
  42% 
female: 
  18% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  agriculture 85% (engaged in unpaid subsistence farming, herding, and
  fishing)

@Chad, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Chad 
conventional short form: 
  Chad 
local long form: 
  Republique du Tchad 
local short form: 
  Tchad 
Digraph: 
  CD
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  N'Djamena 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 prefectures (prefectures, singular - prefecture); Batha, Biltine,
  Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti, Chari-Baguirmi, Guera, Kanem, Lac, Logone
  Occidental, Logone Oriental, Mayo-Kebbi, Moyen-Chari, Ouaddai,
  Salamat, Tandjile
Independence: 
  11 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day 11 August (1960) 
Constitution: 
  22 December 1989, suspended 3 December 1990; Provisional National
  Charter 1 March 1991; constitutional commission drafting new
  constitution to submit to transitional parliament for ratification in
  April 1994
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and Chadian customary law; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  universal at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Col. Idriss DEBY, since 4 December 1990 (after seizing power
  on 3 December 1990 - transitional government's mandate expires April
  1995)
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Kassire Delwa KOUMAKOYE (since 17 November 1993)
cabinet: 
  Council of State; appointed by the president on recommendation of the
  prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Consultative Council (Conceil National
Consultatif): 
  elections last held 8 July 1990; disbanded 3 December 1990 and
  replaced by the Provisional Council of the Republic having 30 members
  appointed by President DEBY on 8 March 1991; this, in turn, was
  replaced by a 57-member Higher Transitional Council (Conseil Superieur
  de Transition) elected by a specially convened Sovereign National
  Conference on 6 April 1993
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS; former dissident group), Idriss
  DEBY, chairman
note: 
  President DEBY, who promised political pluralism, a new constitution,
  and free elections by April 1994, has postponed these initiatives for
  another year; there are numerous dissident groups and 26 opposition
  political parties
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS,
  NAM, OAU, OIC, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Ambassador KOUMBARIA Laoumaye Mekonyo died on 16 May 1994 
chancery: 
  2002 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-4009 
FAX: 
  (202) 265-1937 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Lawrence POPE 
embassy: 
  Avenue Felix Eboue, N'Djamena 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 413, N'Djamena 
telephone: 
  [235] (51) 62-18, 40-09, or 62-11 
FAX: 
  [235] (51) 33-72 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red;
  similar to the flag of Romania; also similar to the flag of Andorra,
  which has a national coat of arms featuring a quartered shield
  centered in the yellow band; design was based on the flag of France
Overview: 
  Climate, geographic remoteness, poor resource endowment, and lack of
  infrastructure make Chad one of the most underdeveloped countries in
  the world. Its economy is hobbled by political turmoil, conflict with
  Libya, drought, and food shortages. Consequently the economy has shown
  little progress in recent years in overcoming a severe setback brought
  on by civil war in the late 1980s. Over 80% of the work force is
  involved in subsistence farming and fishing. Cotton is the major cash
  crop, accounting for at least half of exports. Chad is highly
  dependent on foreign aid, especially food credits, given chronic
  shortages in several regions. The government hopes that discovery of
  several oil deposits near Lake Chad will lead to economic revival and
  a windfall in government revenues by 2000.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  8.4% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2%-3% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $115 million 
expenditures: 
  $412 million, including capital expenditures of $218 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $193.9 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  cotton 48%, cattle 35%, textiles 5%, fish
partners: 
  France, Nigeria, Cameroon
Imports: 
  $294.1 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment 39%, industrial goods 20%,
  petroleum products 13%, foodstuffs 9%; note - excludes military
  equipment
partners: 
  US, France, Nigeria, Cameroon
External debt: 
  $492 million (December 1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 12.9% (1989 est.); accounts for nearly 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  40,000 kW
production: 
  70 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  15 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  cotton textile mills, slaughterhouses, brewery, natron (sodium
  carbonate), soap, cigarettes
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 45% of GDP; largely subsistence farming; cotton
  most important cash crop; food crops include sorghum, millet, peanuts,
  rice, potatoes, manioc; livestock - cattle, sheep, goats, camels;
  self-sufficient in food in years of adequate rainfall
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $198 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.5
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $28 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $80 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine Francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994 the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Chad, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  31,322 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 32 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 7,300 km; earth 23,990 km 
Inland waterways: 
  2,000 km navigable
Airports: 
total: 
  68 
usable: 
  58 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  27 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system of radiocommunication stations for intercity links;
  broadcast stations - 6 AM, 1 FM, limited TV service; many facilities
  are inoperative; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Chad, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (includes Ground Forces, Air Force, and Gendarmerie), Republican
  Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,276,167; fit for military service 663,326; reach
  military age (20) annually 54,027 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $58 million, 5.6% of GDP (1989)


@Chile, Geography

Location: 
  Southern South America, bordering the South Pacific Ocean between
  Argentina and Peru
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  756,950 sq km 
land area: 
  748,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than twice the size of Montana
note: 
  includes Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) and Isla Sala y Gomez
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,171 km, Argentina 5,150 km, Bolivia 861 km, Peru 160 km 
Coastline: 
  6,435 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of the southern boundary with Argentina is indefinite;
  Bolivia has wanted a sovereign corridor to the South Pacific Ocean
  since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in 1884; dispute with Bolivia
  over Rio Lauca water rights; territorial claim in Antarctica (Chilean
  Antarctic Territory) partially overlaps Argentine and British claims
Climate: 
  temperate; desert in north; cool and damp in south
Terrain: 
  low coastal mountains; fertile central valley; rugged Andes in east
Natural resources: 
  copper, timber, iron ore, nitrates, precious metals, molybdenum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  16% 
forest and woodland: 
  21% 
other: 
  56% 
Irrigated land: 
  12,650 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution
  from untreated sewage; deforestation contributing to loss of
  biodiversity; soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  subject to severe earthquakes; active volcanism; tsunamis
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands,
  Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location relative to sea lanes between Atlantic and Pacific
  Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel, Drake Passage); Atacama
  Desert one of world's driest regions

@Chile, People

Population: 
  13,950,557 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.51% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  20.59 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.49 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  15.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.51 years 
male: 
  71.52 years 
female: 
  77.65 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.5 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Chilean(s) 
adjective: 
  Chilean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  European and European-Indian 95%, Indian 3%, other 2% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 89%, Protestant 11%, Jewish 
Languages: 
  Spanish 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  94% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  4.728 million 
by occupation: 
  services 38.3% (includes government 12%), industry and commerce 33.8%,
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 19.2%, mining 2.3%, construction
  6.4% (1990)

@Chile, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Chile 
conventional short form: 
  Chile 
local long form: 
  Republica de Chile 
local short form: 
  Chile 
Digraph: 
  CI
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Santiago 
Administrative divisions: 
  13 regions (regiones, singular - region); Aisen del General Carlos
  Ibanez del Campo, Antofagasta, Araucania, Atacama, Bio-Bio, Coquimbo,
  Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins, Los Lagos, Magallanes y de la
  Antartica Chilena, Maule, Region Metropolitana, Tarapaca, Valparaiso
note: 
  the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica
Independence: 
  18 September 1810 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 18 September (1810) 
Constitution: 
  11 September 1980, effective 11 March 1981; amended 30 July 1989
Legal system: 
  based on Code of 1857 derived from Spanish law and subsequent codes
  influenced by French and Austrian law; judicial review of legislative
  acts in the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (since 11 March 1994) election last
  held 11 December 1993 (next to be held December 1999); results -
  Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (PDC) 58%, Arturo ALESSANDRI 24.4%, other
  17.6%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Congress (Congreso Nacional)
Senate (Senado): 
  election last held 11 December 1993 (next to be held December 1997);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (46 total, 38 elected)
  Concertation of Parties for Democracy 21 (PDC 13, PS 4, PPD 3, PR 1),
  Union for the Progress of Chile 15 (RN 11, UDI 3, UCC 1), right-wing
  independents 10
Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados): 
  election last held 11 December 1993 (next to be held December 1997);
  results - Concertation of Parties for Democracy 53.95% (PDC 27.16%, PS
  12.01%, PPD 11.82%, PR 2.96%,); Union for the Progress of Chile 30.57%
  (RN 15.25%, UDI 12.13%, UCC 3.19%); seats - (120 total) Concertation
  of Parties for Democracy 70 (PDC 37, PPD 15, PR 2, PS 15, left-wing
  independent 1), Union for the Progress of Chile 47 (RN 30, UDI 15, UCC
  2), right-wing independents 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Concertation of Parties for Democracy consists mainly of four parties:
  Christian Democratic Party (PDC), Gutenberg MARTINEZ; Socialist Party
  (PS), Camilo ESCALONA; Party for Democracy (PPD), Victor Manuel
  REBOLLEDO; Radical Party (PR), Carlos GONZALEZ Marquez; Union for the
  Progress of Chile consists mainly of three parties: National Renewal
  (RN), Andres ALLAMAND; Independent Democratic Union (UDI), Jovino
  NOVOA; Center Center Union (UCC), Francisco Javier ERRAZURIZ
Other political or pressure groups: 
  revitalized university student federations at all major universities;
  labor - United Labor Central (CUT) includes trade unionists from the
  country's five largest labor confederations; Roman Catholic Church
Member of: 
  CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO,
  ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, NAM, OAS, ONUSAL, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMOGIP, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John BIEHL del Rio 
chancery: 
  1732 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 785-1746 
FAX: 
  (202) 887-5579 
consulate(s) general: 
  Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco,
  and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Curtis W. KAMMAN 
embassy: 
  Codina Building, 1343 Agustinas, Santiago 
mailing address: 
  Unit 4127, Santiago; APO AA 34033 
telephone: 
  [56] (2) 671-0133 
FAX: 
  [56] (2) 699-1141 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red; there is a blue
  square the same height as the white band at the hoist-side end of the
  white band; the square bears a white five-pointed star in the center;
  design was based on the US flag

@Chile, Economy

Overview: 
  Chile has a prosperous, essentially free market economy, with the
  degree of government intervention varying according to the philosophy
  of the different regimes. Under the center-left government of
  President AYLWIN, which took power in March 1990, spending on social
  welfare has risen steadily. At the same time business investment,
  exports and consumer spending have also grown substantially. The new
  president, FREI, who takes office in March 1994, is expected to
  emphasize social spending even more. Growth in 1991-93 has averaged 8%
  annually, with an estimated one million Chileans having moved out of
  poverty in the last four years. Copper remains vital to the health of
  the economy; Chile is the world's largest producer and exporter of
  copper.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $96 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5.8% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $7,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  12.3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.1% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $10.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $10.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.2 billion (1993)
Exports: 
  $10 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  copper 41%, other metals and minerals 8.7%, wood products 7.1%, fish
  and fishmeal 9.8%, fruits 8.4% (1991)
partners: 
  EC 29%, Japan 17%, US 16%, Argentina 5%, Brazil 5% (1992)
Imports: 
  $9.2 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  capital goods 25.2%, spare parts 24.8%, raw materials 15.4%, petroleum
  10%, foodstuffs 5.7%
partners: 
  EC 24%, US 21%, Brazil 10%, Japan 10% (1992)
External debt: 
  $19.7 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 9.3% (1992 est.); accounts for 34% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,769,000 kW
production: 
  22.01 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,630 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  copper, other minerals, foodstuffs, fish processing, iron and steel,
  wood and wood products, transport equipment, cement, textiles
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 7% of GDP (including fishing and forestry); major
  exporter of fruit, fish, and timber products; major crops - wheat,
  corn, grapes, beans, sugar beets, potatoes, deciduous fruit; livestock
  products - beef, poultry, wool; self-sufficient in most foods; 1991
  fish catch of 6.6 million metric tons; net agricultural importer
Illicit drugs: 
  a minor transshipment country for cocaine destined for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $521 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.6
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $386 million 
Currency: 
  1 Chilean peso (Ch$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Chilean pesos (Ch$) per US$1 - 430.57 (January 1994), 404.35 (1993),
  362.59 (1992), 349.37 (1991), 305.06 (1990), 267.16 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Chile, Communications

Railroads: 
  7,766 km total; 3,974 km 1.676-meter gauge, 150 km 1.435-meter
  standard gauge, 3,642 km 1.000-meter gauge; 1,865 km 1.676-meter gauge
  and 80 km 1.000-meter gauge electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  79,993 km 
paved: 
  10,984 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel or earth 68,615 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  725 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 755 km; petroleum products 785 km; natural gas 320 km 
Ports: 
  Antofagasta, Iquique, Puerto Montt, Punta Arenas, Valparaiso, San
  Antonio, Talcahuano, Arica
Merchant marine: 
  31 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 449,253 GRT/755,821 DWT, bulk
  10, cargo 7, chemical tanker 3, combination ore/oil 3, liquefied gas
  tanker 3, oil tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3 
note: 
  in addition, 1 naval tanker and 1 military transport are sometimes
  used commercially
Airports: 
total: 
  392 
usable: 
  349 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  47 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  13 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  58 
Telecommunications: 
  modern telephone system based on extensive microwave radio relay
  facilities; 768,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 159 AM, no FM,
  131 TV, 11 shortwave; satellite ground stations - 2 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT and 3 domestic

@Chile, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army of the Nation, National Navy (including Naval Air, Coast Guard,
  and Marines), Air Force of the Nation, Carabineros of Chile (National
  Police), Investigative Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 3,705,321; fit for military service 2,759,130; reach
  military age (19) annually 120,512 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1 billion, 3.4% of GDP (1991 est.)


@China

Header
Affiliation: 
  (also see separate Taiwan entry) 

@China, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, between India and Mongolia
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  9,596,960 sq km 
land area: 
  9,326,410 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than the US
Land boundaries: 
  total 22,143.34 km, Afghanistan 76 km, Bhutan 470 km, Burma 2,185 km,
  Hong Kong 30 km, India 3,380 km, Kazakhstan 1,533 km, North Korea
  1,416 km, Kyrgyzstan 858 km, Laos 423 km, Macau 0.34 km, Mongolia
  4,673 km, Nepal 1,236 km, Pakistan 523 km, Russia (northeast) 3,605
  km, Russia (northwest) 40 km, Tajikistan 414 km, Vietnam 1,281 km 
Coastline: 
  14,500 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  claim to shallow areas of East China Sea and Yellow Sea
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  boundary with India; bilateral negotiations are under way to resolve
  disputed sections of the boundary with Russia; boundary with
  Tajikistan in dispute; a short section of the boundary with North
  Korea is indefinite; involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly
  Islands with Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly
  Brunei; maritime boundary dispute with Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin;
  Paracel Islands occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan;
  claims Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu
  Tai), as does Taiwan
Climate: 
  extremely diverse; tropical in south to subarctic in north
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains, high plateaus, deserts in west; plains, deltas, and
  hills in east
Natural resources: 
  coal, iron ore, petroleum, mercury, tin, tungsten, antimony,
  manganese, molybdenum, vanadium, magnetite, aluminum, lead, zinc,
  uranium, hydropower potential (world's largest) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  31% 
forest and woodland: 
  14% 
other: 
  45% 
Irrigated land: 
  478,220 sq km (1991 - Chinese statistic)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from the overwhelming use of coal as a fuel, produces
  acid rain which is damaging forests; water pollution from industrial
  effluents; many people do not have access to safe drinking water; less
  than 10% of sewage receives treatment; deforestation; estimated loss
  of one-third of agricultural land since 1957 to soil erosion and
  economic development; desertification
natural hazards: 
  frequent typhoons (about five per year along southern and eastern
  coasts); damaging floods; tsunamis; earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Whaling; signed,
  but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  world's third-largest country (after Russia and Canada)

@China, People

Population: 
  1,190,431,106 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.08% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  18.1 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.35 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  52.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.91 years 
male: 
  66.93 years 
female: 
  68.99 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.84 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Chinese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Chinese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Han Chinese 91.9%, Zhuang, Uygur, Hui, Yi, Tibetan, Miao, Manchu,
  Mongol, Buyi, Korean, and other nationalities 8.1% 
Religions: 
  Daoism (Taoism), Buddhism, Muslim 2%-3%, Christian 1% (est.)
note: 
  officially atheist, but traditionally pragmatic and eclectic
Languages: 
  Standard Chinese or Mandarin (Putonghua, based on the Beijing
  dialect), Yue (Cantonese), Wu (Shanghainese), Minbei (Fuzhou), Minnan
  (Hokkien-Taiwanese), Xiang, Gan, Hakka dialects, minority languages
  (see Ethnic divisions entry)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  78% 
male: 
  87% 
female: 
  68% 
Labor force: 
  567.4 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and forestry 60%, industry and commerce 25%, construction
  and mining 5%, social services 5%, other 5% (1990 est.)

@China, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  People's Republic of China 
conventional short form: 
  China 
local long form: 
  Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo 
local short form: 
  Zhong Guo 
Abbreviation: 
  PRC 
Digraph: 
  CH
Type: 
  Communist state 
Capital: 
  Beijing 
Administrative divisions: 
  23 provinces (sheng, singular and plural), 5 autonomous regions*
  (zizhiqu, singular and plural), and 3 municipalities** (shi, singular
  and plural); Anhui, Beijing Shi**, Fujian, Gansu, Guangdong, Guangxi*,
  Guizhou, Hainan, Hebei, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu,
  Jiangxi, Jilin, Liaoning, Nei Mongol*, Ningxia*, Qinghai, Shaanxi,
  Shandong, Shanghai Shi**, Shanxi, Sichuan, Tianjin Shi**, Xinjiang*,
  Xizang* (Tibet), Yunnan, Zhejiang
note: 
  China considers Taiwan its 23rd province
Independence: 
  221 BC (unification under the Qin or Ch'in Dynasty 221 BC; Qing or
  Ch'ing Dynasty replaced by the Republic on 12 February 1912; People's
  Republic established 1 October 1949)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 1 October (1949) 
Constitution: 
  most recent promulgated 4 December 1982
Legal system: 
  a complex amalgam of custom and statute, largely criminal law;
  rudimentary civil code in effect since 1 January 1987; new legal codes
  in effect since 1 January 1980; continuing efforts are being made to
  improve civil, administrative, criminal, and commercial law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President JIANG Zemin (since 27 March 1993); Vice President RONG Yiren
  (since 27 March 1993); election last held 27 March 1993 (next to be
  held NA 1998); results - JIANG Zemin was nominally elected by the
  Eighth National People's Congress
chief of state and head of government (de facto): 
  DENG Xiaoping (since NA 1977) 
head of government: 
  Premier LI Peng (Acting Premier since 24 November 1987, Premier since
  9 April 1988)  Vice Premier ZHU Rongji (since 8 April 1991); Vice
  Premier ZOU Jiahua (since 8 April 1991); Vice Premier QIAN Qichen
  (since 29 March 1993); Vice Premier LI Lanqing (29 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  State Council; containing 28 ministers and 8 state commissions and
  appointed by the National People's Congress (March 1993)
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National People's Congress: 
  (Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui) elections last held March 1993 (next
  to be held March 1998); results - CCP is the only party but there are
  also independents; seats - (2,977 total) (elected at county or xian
  level)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme People's Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Chinese Communist Party (CCP), JIANG Zemin, general secretary of the
  Central Committee (since 24 June 1989); eight registered small parties
  controlled by CCP
Other political or pressure groups: 
  such meaningful opposition as exists consists of loose coalitions,
  usually within the party and government organization, that vary by
  issue
Member of: 
  AfDB, APEC, AsDB, CCC, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, MINURSO, NAM (observer), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIKOM, UN Security Council, UNTAC, UNTSO, UN Trusteeship Council,
  UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador LI Daoyu 
chancery: 
  2300 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 328-2500 through 2502 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador J. Stapleton ROY 
embassy: 
  Xiu Shui Bei Jie 3, Beijing 
mailing address: 
  100600, PSC 461, Box 50, Beijing or FPO AP 96521-0002 
telephone: 
  [86] (1) 532-3831 
FAX: 
  [86] (1) 532-3178 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang 
Flag: 
  red with a large yellow five-pointed star and four smaller yellow
  five-pointed stars (arranged in a vertical arc toward the middle of
  the flag) in the upper hoist-side corner

@China, Economy

Overview: 
  Beginning in late 1978 the Chinese leadership has been trying to move
  the economy from the sluggish Soviet-style centrally planned economy
  to a more productive and flexible economy with market elements, but
  still within the framework of monolithic Communist control. To this
  end the authorities switched to a system of household responsibility
  in agriculture in place of the old collectivization, increased the
  authority of local officials and plant managers in industry, permitted
  a wide variety of small-scale enterprise in services and light
  manufacturing, and opened the economy to increased foreign trade and
  investment. The result has been a strong surge in production,
  particularly in agriculture in the early 1980s. Industry also has
  posted major gains, especially in coastal areas near Hong Kong and
  opposite Taiwan, where foreign investment and modern production
  methods have helped spur production of both domestic and export goods.
  Aggregate output has more than doubled since 1978. On the darker side,
  the leadership has often experienced in its hybrid system the worst
  results of socialism (bureaucracy, lassitude, corruption) and of
  capitalism (windfall gains and stepped-up inflation). Beijing thus has
  periodically backtracked, retightening central controls at intervals.
  In 1992-93 annual growth of GDP has accelerated, particularly in the
  coastal areas - to more than 10% annually according to official
  claims. In late 1993 China's leadership approved additional reforms
  aimed at giving more play to market-oriented institutions and at
  strengthening the center's control over the financial system. Popular
  resistance, changes in central policy, and loss of authority by rural
  cadres have weakened China's population control program, which is
  essential to the nation's long-term economic viability.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent -  $2.61 trillion (1993 estimate
  based on a 1990 figure from the UN International Comparison Program,
  as extended to 1991 and published in the World Bank's World
  Development Report 1993; and as extrapolated by use of official
  Chinese growth statistics for 1992 and 1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  13.4% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $2,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  17.6% (December 1993 over December 1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.3% in urban areas (1992); substantial underemployment
Budget: 
  deficit $15.6 billion (1993)
Exports: 
  $92 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  textiles, garments, footwear, toys, crude oil
partners: 
  Hong Kong, US, Japan, Germany, South Korea, Russia (1993)
Imports: 
  $104 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  rolled steel, motor vehicles, textile machinery, oil products
partners: 
  Japan, Taiwan, US, Hong Kong, Germany, South Korea (1993)
External debt: 
  $80 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 20.8% (1992)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  158,690,000 kW
production: 
  740 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  630 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  iron and steel, coal, machine building, armaments, textiles,
  petroleum, cement, chemical fertilizers, consumer durables, food
  processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 26% of GNP; among the world's largest producers of rice,
  potatoes, sorghum, peanuts, tea, millet, barley, and pork; commercial
  crops include cotton, other fibers, and oilseeds; produces variety of
  livestock products; basically self-sufficient in food; fish catch of
  13.35 million metric tons (including fresh water and pond raised)
  (1991)
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of opium; bulk of production is in Yunnan Province;
  transshipment point for heroin produced in the Golden Triangle
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  to less developed countries (1970-89) $7 billion 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-87), $220.7 million;  Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-87), $13.5
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 yuan (Y) = 10 jiao
Exchange rates: 
  yuan (Y) per US$1 - 8.7000 (January 1994), 5.7620 (1993), 5.5146
  (1992), 5.3234 (1991), 4.7832 (1990), 3.7651 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 1 January 1994, the People's Bank of China quotes the
  midpoint rate against the US dollar based on the previous day's
  prevailing rate in the interbank foreign exchange market
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@China, Communications

Railroads: 
  total about 64,000 km; 54,000 km of common carrier lines, of which
  53,400 km are 1.435-meter gauge (standard) and 600 km are 1.000-meter
  gauge (narrow); 11,200 km of standard gauge common carrier route are
  double tracked and 6,900 km are electrified (1990); an additional
  10,000 km of varying gauges (0.762 to 1.067-meter) are dedicated
  industrial lines
Highways: 
total: 
  1.029 million km 
paved: 
  170,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel/improved earth 648,000 km; unimproved earth 211,000 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  138,600 km; about 109,800 km navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 9,700 km; petroleum products 1,100 km; natural gas 6,200 km
  (1990)
Ports: 
  Dalian, Guangzhou, Huangpu, Qingdao, Qinhuangdao, Shanghai, Xingang,
  Zhanjiang, Ningbo, Xiamen, Tanggu, Shantou
Merchant marine: 
  1,541 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 14,884,756 GRT/22,475,985
  DWT, barge carrier 1, bulk 285, cargo 819, chemical tanker 13,
  combination bulk 9, container 85, liquefied gas 4, multifunction/barge
  carrier 1, oil tanker 192, passenger 24, passenger-cargo 25,
  refrigerated cargo 17, roll-on/roll-off cargo 21, short-sea passenger
  43, vehicle carrier 2 
note: 
  China beneficially owns an additional 227 ships (1,000 GRT or over)
  totaling approximately 6,187,117 DWT that operate under Panamanian,
  British, Hong Kong, Maltese, Liberian, Vanuatu, Cypriot, Saint
  Vincent, Bahamian, and Romanian registry
Airports: 
total: 
  330 
usable: 
  330 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  260 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  fewer than 10 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  90 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  200 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic and international services are increasingly available for
  private use; unevenly distributed internal system serves principal
  cities, industrial centers, and most townships; 11,000,000 telephones
  (December 1989); broadcast stations - 274 AM, unknown FM, 202 (2,050
  repeaters) TV; more than 215 million radio receivers; 75 million TVs;
  satellite earth stations - 4 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean
  INTELSAT, 1 INMARSAT, and 55 domestic

@China, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  People's Liberation Army (PLA), PLA Navy (including Marines), PLA Air
  Force, Second Artillery Corps (the strategic missle force), People's
  Armed Police (internal security troops, nominally subordinate to
  Ministry of Public Security, but included by the Chinese as part of
  the "armed forces" and considered to be an adjunct to the PLA in war
  time)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 347,458,052; fit for military service 192,546,413;
  reach military age (18) annually 10,256,181 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  defense budget - 52.04 billion yuan, NA% of GDP (1994 est.); note -
  conversion of the defense budget into US dollars using the current
  exchange rate could produce misleading results


@Christmas Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Australia) 

@Christmas Island, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, in the Indian Ocean, between Australia and
  Indonesia
Map references: 
  Southeast Asia 
Area: 
total area: 
  135 sq km 
land area: 
  135 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.8 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  138.9 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; heat and humidity moderated by trade winds
Terrain: 
  steep cliffs along coast rise abruptly to central plateau
Natural resources: 
  phosphate 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  almost completely surrounded by a reef
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  located along major sea lanes of Indian Ocean

@Christmas Island, People

Population: 
  973 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -9% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  NA
Death rate: 
  NA
Net migration rate: 
  NA
Infant mortality rate: 
  NA
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  NA
male: 
  NA
female: 
  NA
Total fertility rate: 
  NA
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Christmas Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Christmas Island 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chinese 61%, Malay 25%, European 11%, other 3%, no indigenous
  population
Religions: 
  Buddhist 36.1%, Muslim 25.4%, Christian 17.7% (Roman Catholic 8.2%,
  Church of England 3.2%, Presbyterian 0.9%, Uniting Church 0.4%,
  Methodist 0.2%, Baptist 0.1%, and other 4.7%), none 12.7%, unknown
  4.6%, other 3.5% (1981)
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  all workers are employees of the Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas
  Island, Ltd.

@Christmas Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of Christmas Island 
conventional short form: 
  Christmas Island 
Digraph: 
  KT
Type: 
  territory of Australia 
Capital: 
  The Settlement 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Independence: 
  none (territory of Australia)
National holiday: 
  NA 
Constitution: 
  Christmas Island Act of 1958
Legal system: 
  under the authority of the governor general of Australia
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Administrator M. J. GRIMES (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Advisory Council  
Legislative branch: 
  none
Judicial branch: 
  none
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of Australia)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Flag: 
  the flag of Australia is used

@Christmas Island, Economy

Overview: 
  Phosphate mining had been the only significant economic activity, but
  in December 1987 the Australian Government closed the mine as no
  longer economically viable. Plans have been under way to reopen the
  mine and also to build a casino and hotel to develop tourism.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  phosphate
partners: 
  Australia, NZ
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  consumer goods
partners: 
  principally Australia
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  11,000 kW
production: 
  30 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  17,800 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  phosphate extraction (near depletion)
Agriculture: 
  NA
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364 (January 1994), 1.4704,
  (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2836 (1991), 1.2799 (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Christmas Island, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Flying Fish Cove
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, 1 TV

@Christmas Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Australia


@Clipperton Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (possession of France) 

@Clipperton Island, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, in the North Pacific Ocean, 1,120 km southwest of
  Mexico
Map references: 
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  7 sq km 
land area: 
  7 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 12 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  11.1 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Mexico
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  coral atoll
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (all coral)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  reef about 8 km in circumference

@Clipperton Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Clipperton Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Clipperton Island 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ile Clipperton 
former: 
  sometimes called Ile de la Passion 
Digraph: 
  IP
Type: 
  French possession administered by France from French Polynesia by High
  Commissioner of the Republic
Capital: 
  none; administered by France from French Polynesia
Independence: 
  none (possession of France)

@Clipperton Island, Economy

Overview: 
  The only economic activity is a tuna fishing station.

@Clipperton Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only

@Clipperton Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Australia) 

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, in the Indian Ocean, 1,070 km southwest of
  Indonesia, about halfway between Australia and Sri Lanka
Map references: 
  Southeast Asia 
Area: 
total area: 
  14 sq km 
land area: 
  14 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 24 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
note: 
  includes the two main islands of West Island and Home Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  2.6 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  pleasant, modified by the southeast trade wind for about nine months
  of the year; moderate rain fall
Terrain: 
  flat, low-lying coral atolls
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  two coral atolls thickly covered with coconut palms and other
  vegetation

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands, People

Population: 
  598 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.98% (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cocos Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Cocos Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
West Island: 
  Europeans 
Home Island: 
  Cocos Malays 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslims 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
Digraph: 
  CK
Type: 
  territory of Australia 
Capital: 
  West Island 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Independence: 
  none (territory of Australia)
National holiday: 
  NA 
Constitution: 
  Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act of 1955
Legal system: 
  based upon the laws of Australia and local laws
Suffrage: 
  NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Administrator B. CUNNINGHAM (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Islands Council; Chairman of the Islands Council Haji WAHIN bin Bynie
  (since NA)
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Islands Council
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of Australia)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Flag: 
  the flag of Australia is used

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  Grown throughout the islands, coconuts are the sole cash crop. Copra
  and fresh coconuts are the major export earners. Small local gardens
  and fishing contribute to the food supply, but additional food and
  most other necessities must be imported from Australia.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  copra
partners: 
  Australia
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  foodstuffs
partners: 
  Australia
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,000 kW
production: 
  2 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,980 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  copra products
Agriculture: 
  gardens provide vegetables, bananas, pawpaws, coconuts
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364 (January 1994), 1.4704
  (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2836 (1991), 1.2799 (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  none; lagoon anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  250 radios (1985); linked by telephone, telex, and facsimile
  communications via satellite with Australia; broadcast stations - 1
  AM, no FM, no TV

@Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Australia



@Colombia, Geography

Location: 
  Northern South America, between Panama and Venezuela
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,138,910 sq km 
land area: 
  1,038,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three times the size of Montana
note: 
  includes Isla de Malpelo, Roncador Cay, Serrana Bank, and Serranilla
  Bank
Land boundaries: 
  total 7,408 km, Brazil 1,643 km, Ecuador 590 km, Panama 225 km, Peru
  2,900 km, Venezuela 2,050 km 
Coastline: 
  3,208 km (Caribbean Sea 1,760 km, North Pacific Ocean 1,448 km)
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary dispute with Venezuela in the Gulf of Venezuela;
  territorial dispute with Nicaragua over Archipelago de San Andres y
  Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank
Climate: 
  tropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in highlands
Terrain: 
  flat coastal lowlands, central highlands, high Andes Mountains,
  eastern lowland plains
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, coal, iron ore, nickel, gold, copper, emeralds
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  29% 
forest and woodland: 
  49% 
other: 
  16% 
Irrigated land: 
  5,150 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil damage from overuse of pesticides
natural hazards: 
  highlands subject to volcanic eruptions; periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping
Note: 
  only South American country with coastlines on both North Pacific
  Ocean and Caribbean Sea

@Colombia, People

Population: 
  35,577,556 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.77% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  22.64 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.75 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  28.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.1 years 
male: 
  69.33 years 
female: 
  74.95 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.47 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Colombian(s) 
adjective: 
  Colombian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo 58%, white 20%, mulatto 14%, black 4%, mixed black-Indian 3%,
  Indian 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95% 
Languages: 
  Spanish 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  87% 
male: 
  88% 
female: 
  86% 
Labor force: 
  12 million (1990)
by occupation: 
  services 46%, agriculture 30%, industry 24% (1990)

@Colombia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Colombia 
conventional short form: 
  Colombia 
local long form: 
  Republica de Colombia 
local short form: 
  Colombia 
Digraph: 
  CO
Type: 
  republic; executive branch dominates government structure
Capital: 
  Bogota 
Administrative divisions: 
  32 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento) and 1 capital
  district* (distrito capital); Amazonas, Antioquia, Arauca, Atlantico,
  Bogota*, Bolivar, Boyaca, Caldas, Caqueta, Casanare, Cauca, Cesar,
  Choco, Cordoba, Cundinamarca, Guainia, Guaviare, Huila, La Guajira,
  Magdalena, Meta, Narino, Norte de Santander, Putumayo, Quindio,
  Risaralda, San Andres y Providencia, Santander, Sucre, Tolima, Valle
  del Cauca, Vaupes, Vichada  
Independence: 
  20 July 1810 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 20 July (1810) 
Constitution: 
  5 July 1991
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish law; a new criminal code modeled after US procedures
  was enacted in 1992-93; judicial review of executive and legislative
  acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Cesar GAVIRIA Trujillo (since 7 August 1990);
  President-designate Juan Manuel SANTOS (since NA 1993); election last
  held 27 May 1990 (next to be held May 1994); results - Cesar GAVIRIA
  Trujillo (Liberal Party) 47%, Alvaro GOMEZ Hurtado (National Salvation
  Movement) 24%, Antonio NAVARRO Wolff (AD/M-19) 13%, Rodrigo LLOREDA
  (Conservative Party) 12%
note: 
  a new government will be inaugurated on 7 August 1994; the
  presidential election of 29 May 1994 resulted in no candidate
  receiving more than 50% of the total vote and a run-off election to
  select a president from the two leading candidates was held on 19 June
  1994; results - Ernesto SAMPER Pizano (Liberal Party) 50.4%, Andres
  PASTRANA Arango (Conservative Party) 48.6%, blank votes 1%; Humberto
  de la CALLE was elected vice president; electing a vice president is a
  new proceedure that replaces the traditional appointment of
  president-designates by newly elected presidents
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Congress (Congreso)
Senate (Senado): 
  elections last held 13 March 1994 (next to be held NA March 1998);
  preliminary results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (102 total)
  Liberal Party 59, conservatives (includes PC, MSN, and NDF) 31, other
  12
House of Representatives (Camara de Representantes): 
  elections last held 13 March 1994 (next to be held NA March 1998);
  preliminary results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (161 total)
  Liberal Party 89, conservatives (includes PC, MSN, and NDF) 53,
  AD/M-19 2, other 17
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justical), Constitutional
  Court, Council of State 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Liberal Party (PL), Ernesto SAMPER Pizano, president; Conservative
  Party (PC), Misael PASTRANA Borrero; National Salvation Movement
  (MSN), Alvaro GOMEZ Hurtado; New Democratic Force (NDF), Andres
  PASTRANA Arango; Democratic Alliance M-19 (AD/M-19) is a coalition of
  small leftist parties and dissident liberals and conservatives;
  Patriotic Union (UP) is a legal political party formed by
  Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and Colombian Communist
  Party (PCC), Carlos ROMERO
Other political or pressure groups: 
  three insurgent groups are active in Colombia - Revolutionary Armed
  Forces of Colombia (FARC), Manuel MARULANDA and Alfonso CANO; National
  Liberation Army (ELN), Manuel PEREZ; and dissidents of the recently
  demobilized People's Liberation Army (EPL), Francisco CARABALLO;
  Francisco CARABALLO was captured by the government in June 1994
Member of: 
  AG, CDB, CG, ECLAC, FAO, G-3, G-11, G-24, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, NAM, OAS,
  ONUSAL, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNPROFOR,
  UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Gabriel SILVA 
chancery: 
  2118 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 387-8338 
FAX: 
  (202) 232-8643 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York,
  San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and Washington 
consulate(s): 
  Atlanta, Detroit, Los Angeles, and Tampa 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Morris D. BUSBY 
embassy: 
  Calle 38, No. 8-61, Bogota 
mailing address: 
  Apartado Aereo 3831, Bogota or APO AA 34038 
telephone: 
  [57] (1) 320-1300 
FAX: 
  [57] (1) 288-5687 
consulate(s): 
  Barranquilla 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of yellow (top, double-width), blue, and red;
  similar to the flag of Ecuador, which is longer and bears the
  Ecuadorian coat of arms superimposed in the center

@Colombia, Economy

Overview: 
  Colombia's economic growth has recovered steadily since 1991 as
  President GAVIRIA'S sweeping economic reform measures have taken hold.
  Market reforms have included trade and investment liberalization,
  labor and tax overhauls and bureaucratic streamlining, among other
  things. Furthermore, conservative fiscal and monetary policies have
  helped to steadily reduce inflation to 23% and unemployment to about
  7% in 1993. The rapid development of oil, coal, and other
  nontraditional industries has helped offset the decline in coffee
  prices. A major oil find in 1993 in eastern Colombia may provide an
  extra $3 billion annually to the economy by 1997. Increased foreign
  investment and even greater domestic activity have been hampered,
  however, by a troublesome rural insurgency, a decrepit energy and
  transportation infrastructure, and drug-related violence. Agriculture
  also has encountered problems in adjusting to fewer subsidies, greater
  competition, and the collapse of the international coffee agreement,
  which has kept world coffee prices at near-record lows in 1991-93.
  Business construction was a leading sector in 1993. The substantial
  trade deficit in 1993 was the result of a strong peso that inhibited
  exports and a liberalized government policy that spurred imports.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $192 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5.1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  22.6% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  7.9% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $11 billion 
expenditures: 
  $12 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.2 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $6.9 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum, coffee, coal, bananas, fresh cut flowers
partners: 
  US 39%, EC 25.7%, Japan 2.9%, Venezuela 8.5% (1992)
Imports: 
  $6.7 billion (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  industrial equipment, transportation equipment, consumer goods,
  chemicals, paper products
partners: 
  US 36%, EC 18%, Brazil 4%, Venezuela 6.5%, Japan 8.7% (1992)
External debt: 
  $17 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2% (1993 est.); accounts for 21% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,193,000 kW
production: 
  36 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,050 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, food processing, oil, clothing and footwear, beverages,
  chemicals, metal products, cement; mining - gold, coal, emeralds,
  iron, nickel, silver, salt
Agriculture: 
  growth rate 2.7% (1993 est.) accounts for 21% of GDP; crops make up
  two-thirds and livestock one-third of agricultural output; climate and
  soils permit a wide variety of crops, such as coffee, rice, tobacco,
  corn, sugarcane, cocoa beans, oilseeds, vegetables; forest products
  and shrimp farming are becoming more important
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of coca, opium, and cannabis; about 37,100 hectares
  of coca under cultivation; the world's largest processor of coca
  derivatives into cocaine in 1992; supplier of cocaine to the US and
  other international drug markets
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.6 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $3.3
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89),  $399 million 
Currency: 
  1 Colombian peso (Col$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Colombian pesos (Col$) per US$1 - 921.20 (January 1994), 863.06
  (1993), 759.28 (1992), 633.05 (1991), 502.26 (1990), 382.57 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Colombia, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,386 km; 3,236 km 0.914-meter gauge, single track (2,611 km in use),
  150 km 1.435-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  128,717 km (1989)
paved: 
  10,330 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel/earth 118,387 km 
Inland waterways: 
  14,300 km, navigable by river boats
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 3,585 km; petroleum products 1,350 km; natural gas 830 km;
  natural gas liquids 125 km 
Ports: 
  Barranquilla, Buenaventura, Cartagena, Covenas, San Andres, Santa
  Marta, Tumaco
Merchant marine: 
  27 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 211,777 GRT/335,763 DWT, bulk 7,
  cargo 11, container 6, oil tanker 3 
Airports: 
total: 
  1,369 
usable: 
  1,156 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  73 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-2,659 m: 
  9 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  205 
Telecommunications: 
  nationwide radio relay system; 1,890,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 413 AM, no FM, 33 TV, 28 shortwave; 2 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth stations and 11 domestic satellite earth stations

@Colombia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (Ejercito Nacional), Navy (Armada Nacional, including Marines),
  Air Force (Fuerza Aerea Colombiana), National Police (Policia
  Nacional)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 9,639,080; fit for military service 6,507,935; reach
  military age (18) annually 354,944 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.2 billion (1992 est.)


@Comoros, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Africa, in the extreme northern Mozambique Channel, about
  two-thirds of the way between northern Madagascar and northern
  Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,170 sq km 
land area: 
  2,170 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 12 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  340 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims French-administered Mayotte
Climate: 
  tropical marine; rainy season (November to May)
Terrain: 
  volcanic islands, interiors vary from steep mountains to low hills
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  35% 
permanent crops: 
  8% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  16% 
other: 
  34% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil degradation and erosion; deforestation
natural hazards: 
  cyclones possible during rainy season
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the
  Sea
Note: 
  important location at northern end of Mozambique Channel

@Comoros, People

Population: 
  530,136 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.55% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  46.48 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.95 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  79.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  57.81 years 
male: 
  55.63 years 
female: 
  60.06 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.79 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Comoran(s) 
adjective: 
  Comoran 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Antalote, Cafre, Makoa, Oimatsaha, Sakalava 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 86%, Roman Catholic 14% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), French (official), Comoran (a blend of Swahili and
  Arabic)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  48% 
male: 
  56% 
female: 
  40% 
Labor force: 
  140,000 (1982)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 80%, government 3%
note: 
  51% of population of working age (1985)

@Comoros, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros 
conventional short form: 
  Comoros 
local long form: 
  Republique Federale Islamique des Comores 
local short form: 
  Comores 
Digraph: 
  CN
Type: 
  independent republic 
Capital: 
  Moroni 
Administrative divisions: 
  three islands; Grand Comore (Njazidja), Anjouan (Nzwani), and Moheli
  (Mwali)
note: 
  there are also four municipalities named Domoni, Fomboni, Moroni, and
  Mutsamudu
Independence: 
  6 July 1975 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 6 July (1975) 
Constitution: 
  7 June 1992
Legal system: 
  French and Muslim law in a new consolidated code
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state:: 
  President Said Mohamed DJOHAR (since 11 March 1990); election last
  held 11 March 1990 (next to be held March 1996); results - Said
  Mohamed DJOHAR (UDZIMA) 55%, Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim (UNDC) 45%
head of government:: 
  Prime Minister Mohamed Abdou MADI (since 6 January 1994) appointed by
  President DJOHAR 6 January 1994 (DJOHAR has appointed 14 prime
  ministers in the last three years)
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Federal Assembly (Assemblee Federale): 
  elections last held 12-20 December 1993 (next to be held by NA January
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (42 total)
  Ruling Coalition: RDR 15, UNDC 5, MWANGAZA 2; Opposition: UDZIMA 8,
  other smaller parties 10; 2 seats remained unfilled
note: 
  opposition is boycotting the National Assembly until the government
  promises to investigate fraud in the last election
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  over 20 political parties are currently active, the most important of
  which are; Comoran Union for Progress (UDZIMA), Omar TAMOU; Islands'
  Fraternity and Unity Party (CHUMA), Said Ali KEMAL; Comoran Party for
  Democracy and Progress (PCDP), Ali MROUDJAE; Realizing Freedom's
  Capability (UWEZO), Mouazair ABDALLAH; Democratic Front of the Comoros
  (FDR), Moustapha CHELKH; Dialogue Proposition Action (DPA/MWANGAZA),
  Said MCHAWGAMA; Rally for Change and Democracy (RACHADE), Hassan
  HACHIM; Union for Democracy and Decentralization (UNDC), Mohamed Taki
  Halidi IBRAHAM; Rally for Democracy and Renewal (RDR); Comoran Popular
  Front (FPC), Mohamed HASSANALI, Mohamed El Arif OUKACHA, Abdou
  MOUSTAKIM (Secretary General)
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Amini Ali MOUMIN 
chancery: 
  (temporary) at the Comoran Permanent Mission to the UN, 336 East 45th
  Street, 2nd Floor, New York, NY 10017 
telephone: 
  (212) 972-8010 
FAX: 
  (212) 983-4712 
US diplomatic representation: 
  none; post closed in September 1993
Flag: 
  green with a white crescent placed diagonally (closed side of the
  crescent points to the upper hoist-side corner of the flag); there are
  four white five-pointed stars placed in a line between the points of
  the crescent; the crescent, stars, and color green are traditional
  symbols of Islam; the four stars represent the four main islands of
  the archipelago - Mwali, Njazidja, Nzwani, and Mayotte (which is a
  territorial collectivity of France, but claimed by the Comoros)

@Comoros, Economy

Overview: 
  One of the world's poorest countries, Comoros is made up of several
  islands that have poor transportation links, a young and rapidly
  increasing population, and few natural resources. The low educational
  level of the labor force contributes to a low level of economic
  activity, high unemployment, and a heavy dependence on foreign grants
  and technical assistance. Agriculture, including fishing, hunting, and
  forestry, is the leading sector of the economy. It contributes 40% to
  GDP, employs 80% of the labor force, and provides most of the exports.
  The country is not self-sufficient in food production, and rice, the
  main staple, accounts for 90% of imports. During 1982-86 the
  industrial sector grew at an annual average rate of 5.3%, but its
  contribution to GDP is small. Despite major investment in the tourist
  industry, which accounts for about 25% of GDP, growth has stagnated
  since 1983. A sluggish growth rate of 1.5% during 1985-90 has led to
  large budget deficits, declining incomes, and balance-of-payments
  difficulties. Estimates for 1992 show a moderate increase in the
  growth rate based on increased exports, tourism, and government
  investment outlays.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $360 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  over 15.9% (1989)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $96 million 
expenditures: 
  $88 million, including capital expenditures of $33 million (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $21 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  vanilla, cloves, perfume oil, copra, ylang-ylang
partners: 
  US 53%, France 41%, Africa 4%, FRG 2% (1988)
Imports: 
  $60 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  rice and other foodstuffs, cement, petroleum products, consumer goods
partners: 
  Europe 62% (France 22%), Africa 5%, Pakistan, China (1988)
External debt: 
  $160 million (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -6.5% (1989 est.); accounts for 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  16,000 kW
production: 
  25 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  50 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  perfume distillation, textiles, furniture, jewelry, construction
  materials, soft drinks
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 40% of GDP; most of population works in subsistence
  agriculture and fishing; plantations produce cash crops for export -
  vanilla, cloves, perfume essences, copra; principal food crops -
  coconuts, bananas, cassava; world's leading producer of essence of
  ylang-ylang (for perfumes) and second-largest producer of vanilla;
  large net food importer
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY80-89), $10 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $435
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $22 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $18 million 
Currency: 
  1 Comoran franc (CF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Comoran francs (CF) per US$1 - 444.03 (January 1994), 254.57 (1993),
  264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26 (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the Comoran franc was devalued to 75 per
  French franc from 50 per French franc at which it had been fixed since
  1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Comoros, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  750 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 210 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel 540 km 
Ports: 
  Mutsamudu, Moroni
Airports: 
total: 
  4 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  sparse system of radio relay and high-frequency radio communication
  stations for interisland and external communications to Madagascar and
  Reunion; over 1,800 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 1 FM, no TV

@Comoros, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Comoran Defense Force (FDC) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 112,918; fit for military service 67,522 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Congo, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean between Gabon and
  Zaire
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  342,000 sq km 
land area: 
  341,500 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Montana
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,504 km, Angola 201 km, Cameroon 523 km, Central African
  Republic 467 km, Gabon 1,903 km, Zaire 2,410 km 
Coastline: 
  169 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  long segment of boundary with Zaire along the Congo River is
  indefinite (no division of the river or its islands has been made)
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy season (March to June); dry season (June to October);
  constantly high temperatures and humidity; particularly enervating
  climate astride the Equator
Terrain: 
  coastal plain, southern basin, central plateau, northern basin
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, timber, potash, lead, zinc, uranium, copper, phosphates,
  natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  29% 
forest and woodland: 
  62% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  40 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from vehicle emissions; water pollution from the dumping
  of raw sewage; deforestation
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Tropical Timber; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection
Note: 
  about 70% of the population lives in Brazzaville, Pointe Noire, or
  along the railroad between them

@Congo, People

Population: 
  2,446,902 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.38% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  40.27 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  16.49 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  111 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  47.56 years 
male: 
  45.76 years 
female: 
  49.41 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.3 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Congolese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Congolese or Congo 
Ethnic divisions: 
south: 
  Kongo 48% 
north: 
  Sangha 20%, M'Bochi 12% 
center: 
  Teke 17%, Europeans 8,500 (mostly French)
Religions: 
  Christian 50%, animist 48%, Muslim 2% 
Languages: 
  French (official), African languages (Lingala and Kikongo are the most
  widely used)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  57% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  44% 
Labor force: 
  79,100 wage earners
by occupation: 
  agriculture 75%, commerce, industry, and government 25%
note: 
  51% of population of working age; 40% of population economically
  active (1985)

@Congo, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of the Congo 
conventional short form: 
  Congo 
local long form: 
  Republique Populaire du Congo 
local short form: 
  Congo 
former: 
  Congo/Brazzaville 
Digraph: 
  CF
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Brazzaville 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 regions (regions, singular - region) and 1 commune*; Bouenza,
  Brazzaville*, Cuvette, Kouilou, Lekoumou, Likouala, Niari, Plateaux,
  Pool, Sangha
Independence: 
  15 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Congolese National Day, 15 August (1960) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution approved by referendum March 1992
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and customary law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Pascal LISSOUBA (since August 1992); election last held 2-16
  August 1992 (next to be held August 1997); results - President Pascal
  LISSOUBA won with 61% of the vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Jacques Joachim YHOMBI-OPANGO (since 23 June 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; named by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  election last held 3 October 1993; results - percentage vote by party
  NA; seats - (125 total) UPADS 64, URD/PCT 58, others 3
Senate: 
  election last held 26 July 1992 (next to be held July 1998); results -
  percentage vote by party NA; seats - (60 total) UPADS 23, MCDDI 14,
  RDD 8, RDPS 5, PCT 2, others 8
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Congolese Labor Party (PCT), Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO, president;
  Pan-African Union for Social Development (UPADS), Pascal LISSOUBA,
  leader; Association for Democracy and Development (RDD) - Joachim
  Yhombi OPANGO, president; Congolese Movement for Democracy and
  Integral Development (MCDDI), Bernard KOLELAS, leader; Association for
  Democracy and Social Progress (RDPS), Jean-Pierre Thystere TCHICAYA,
  president; Union of Democratic Forces (UFD), David Charles GANAO,
  leader; Union for Development and Social Progress (UDPS), Jean-Michael
  BOKAMBA-YANGOUMA, leader
note: 
  Congo has many political parties of which these are among the most
  important
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Union of Congolese Socialist Youth (UJSC); Congolese Trade Union
  Congress (CSC); Revolutionary Union of Congolese Women (URFC); General
  Union of Congolese Pupils and Students (UGEEC)
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT, IBRD,
  ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, UDEAC, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Pierre Damien BOUSSOUKOU-BOUMBA 
chancery: 
  4891 Colorado Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20011 
telephone: 
  (202) 726-5500 or 5501 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William RAMSEY 
embassy: 
  Avenue Amilcar Cabral, Brazzaville 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 1015, Brazzaville 
telephone: 
  (242) 83-20-70 
FAX: 
  [242] 83-63-38 
Flag: 
  red, divided diagonally from the lower hoist side by a yellow band;
  the upper triangle (hoist side) is green and the lower triangle is
  red; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

@Congo, Economy

Overview: 
  Congo's economy is a mixture of village agriculture and handicrafts,
  an industrial sector based largely on oil, support services, and a
  government characterized by budget problems and overstaffing. A reform
  program, supported by the IMF and World Bank, ran into difficulties in
  1990-91 because of problems in changing to a democratic political
  regime and a heavy debt-servicing burden. Oil has supplanted forestry
  as the mainstay of the economy, providing about two-thirds of
  government revenues and exports. In the early 1980s rapidly rising oil
  revenues enabled Congo to finance large-scale development projects
  with growth averaging 5% annually, one of the highest rates in Africa.
  Subsequently, growth has slowed to an average of roughly 1.5%
  annually, only half the population growth rate. Political turmoil and
  misguided government investment have derailed economic reform programs
  sponsored by the IMF and World Bank.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $2,900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  -0.6% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $765 million 
expenditures: 
  $952 million, including capital expenditures of $65 million (1990)
Exports: 
  $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  crude oil 72%, lumber, plywood, coffee, cocoa, sugar, diamonds
partners: 
  US, France, other EC countries
Imports: 
  $704 million (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, consumer goods, intermediate manufactures, capital
  equipment
partners: 
  France, Germany, Italy, Spain, other EC countries, US, Japan, Brazil
External debt: 
  $4.1 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.2% (1989); accounts for 33% of GDP; includes petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  140,000 kW
production: 
  315 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  135 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  petroleum, cement, lumbering, brewing, sugar milling, palm oil, soap,
  cigarette
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 13% of GDP (including fishing and forestry); cassava
  accounts for 90% of food output; other crops - rice, corn, peanuts,
  vegetables; cash crops include coffee and cocoa; forest products
  important export earner; imports over 90% of food needs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $63 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-90), $2.5
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $15 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89),  $338 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Congo, Communications

Railroads: 
  797 km, 1.067-meter gauge, single track (includes 285 km that are
  privately owned)
Highways: 
total: 
  11,960 km 
paved: 
  560 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel or crushed stone 850 km; improved earth 5,350 km; unimproved
  earth 5,200 km 
Inland waterways: 
  the Congo and Ubangi (Oubangui) Rivers provide 1,120 km of
  commercially navigable water transport; the rest are used for local
  traffic only
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 25 km 
Ports: 
  Pointe-Noire (ocean port), Brazzaville (river port)
Airports: 
total: 
  41 
usable: 
  37 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  16 
Telecommunications: 
  services adequate for government use; primary network is composed of
  radio relay routes and coaxial cables; key centers are Brazzaville,
  Pointe-Noire, and Loubomo; 18,100 telephones; broadcast stations - 4
  AM, 1 FM, 4 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean satellite earth station

@Congo, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Marines), Air Force, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 551,151; fit for military service 280,372; reach
  military age (20) annually 24,441 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Cook Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (free association with New Zealand) 

@Cook Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, 4,500 km south of Hawaii in the South Pacific
  Ocean, about halfway between Hawaii and New Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  240 sq km 
land area: 
  240 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 1.3 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  120 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by trade winds
Terrain: 
  low coral atolls in north; volcanic, hilly islands in south
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  22% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  74% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons (November to March)
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change; signed, but not ratified -
  Law of the Sea

@Cook Islands, People

Population: 
  19,124 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.15% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  23.22 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  24.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.14 years 
male: 
  69.2 years 
female: 
  73.1 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.3 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cook Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Cook Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian (full blood) 81.3%, Polynesian and European 7.7%,
  Polynesian and other 7.7%, European 2.4%, other 0.9% 
Religions: 
  Christian (majority of populace members of Cook Islands Christian
  Church)
Languages: 
  English (official), Maori 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  5,810 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 29%, government 27%, services 25%, industry 15%, other 4%
  (1981)

@Cook Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Cook Islands 
Digraph: 
  CW
Type: 
  self-governing parliamentary government in free association with New
  Zealand; Cook Islands is fully responsible for internal affairs; New
  Zealand retains responsibility for external affairs, in consultation
  with the Cook Islands
Capital: 
  Avarua 
Administrative divisions: 
  none
Independence: 
  none (became self-governing in free association with New Zealand on 4
  August 1965 and has the right at any time to move to full independence
  by unilateral action)
National holiday: 
  Constitution Day, 4 August 
Constitution: 
  4 August 1965
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); Representative of the
  Queen Apenera SHORT (since NA); Representative of New Zealand Adrian
  SINCOCK (since NA) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Geoffrey HENRY (since 1 February 1989); Deputy Prime
  Minister Inatio AKARURU (since 1 February 1989) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; collectively responsible to the Parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held 24 March 1994 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (25 total) Cook Islands Party 20,
  Democratic Party 3, Alliance Party 2
note: 
  the House of Arikis (chiefs) advises on traditional matters, but has
  no legislative powers
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Cook Islands Party, Geoffrey HENRY; Democratic Party, Sir Thomas
  DAVIS; Cook Islands Labor Party, Rena JONASSEN; Cook Islands People's
  Party, Sadaraka SADARAKA; Alliance, Norman GEORGE
Member of: 
  AsDB, ESCAP (associate), ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD, INTELSAT (nonsignatory
  user), IOC, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (self-governing in free association with New Zealand)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (self-governing in free association with New Zealand)
Flag: 
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and a
  large circle of 15 white five-pointed stars (one for every island)
  centered in the outer half of the flag

@Cook Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture provides the economic base. The major export earners are
  fruit, copra, and clothing. Manufacturing activities are limited to a
  fruit-processing plant and several clothing factories. Economic
  development is hindered by the isolation of the islands from foreign
  markets and a lack of natural resources and good transportation links.
  A large trade deficit is annually made up for by remittances from
  emigrants and from foreign aid, largely from New Zealand. Current
  economic development plans call for exploiting the tourism potential
  and expanding the fishing industry.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent  - $57 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6.2% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $38 million 
expenditures: 
  $34.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $3.4 million (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  copra, fresh and canned fruit, clothing
partners: 
  NZ 80%, Japan
Imports: 
  $50 million (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, textiles, fuels, timber
partners: 
  NZ 49%, Japan, Australia, US
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for 5% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  14,000 kW
production: 
  21 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,170 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  fruit processing, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 12% of GDP, export crops - copra, citrus fruits,
  pineapples, tomatoes, bananas; subsistence crops - yams, taro
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89),  $128 million 
Currency: 
  1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.7771 (January 1994), 1.8495
  (1993), 1.8584 (1992), 1.7265 (1991), 1.6750 (1990), 1.6708 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Cook Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  187 km 
paved: 
  35 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 35 km; improved earth 84 km; unimproved earth 33 km (1980)
Ports: 
  Avatiu
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 or over) totaling 1,464 GRT/2,181 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  7 
usable: 
  7 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV; 11,000 radio receivers; 17,000
  TV receivers (1989); 2,052 telephones; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@Cook Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of New Zealand


@Coral Sea Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Australia) 

@Coral Sea Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Oceania, just off the northeast coast of Australia in the
  Coral Sea
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  less than 3 sq km 
land area: 
  less than 3 sq km 
comparative area: 
  NA
note: 
  includes numerous small islands and reefs scattered over a sea area of
  about 1 million sq km, with Willis Islets the most important
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  3,095 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  sand and coral reefs and islands (or cays)
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (mostly grass or scrub cover)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  no permanent fresh water resources
natural hazards: 
  subject to occasional tropical cyclones
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  important nesting area for birds and turtles

@Coral Sea Islands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are 3 meteorologists

@Coral Sea Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Coral Sea Islands Territory 
conventional short form: 
  Coral Sea Islands 
Digraph: 
  CR
Type: 
  territory of Australia administered by the Ministry for Environment,
  Sport, and Territories
Capital: 
  none; administered from Canberra, Australia
Independence: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Flag: 
  the flag of Australia is used

@Coral Sea Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Coral Sea Islands, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorages only

@Coral Sea Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Australia; visited regularly by the
  Royal Australian Navy; Australia has control over the activities of
  visitors


@Costa Rica, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, between Nicaragua and Panama
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America 
Area: 
total area: 
  51,100 sq km 
land area: 
  50,660 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than West Virginia
note: 
  includes Isla del Coco
Land boundaries: 
  total 639 km, Nicaragua 309 km, Panama 330 km 
Coastline: 
  1,290 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; dry season (December to April); rainy season (May to
  November)
Terrain: 
  coastal plains separated by rugged mountains
Natural resources: 
  hydropower potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  7% 
meadows and pastures: 
  45% 
forest and woodland: 
  34% 
other: 
  8% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,180 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation, largely a result of land clearing for cattle ranching;
  soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  subject to occasional earthquakes, hurricanes along Atlantic coast;
  frequent flooding of lowlands at onset of rainy season; active
  volcanoes
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Marine Life Conservation

@Costa Rica, People

Population: 
  3,342,154 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.31% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.48 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  3.52 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  11 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.8 years 
male: 
  75.88 years 
female: 
  79.81 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.06 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Costa Rican(s) 
adjective: 
  Costa Rican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  white (including mestizo) 96%, black 2%, Indian 1%, Chinese 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), English; spoken around Puerto Limon
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  868,300 
by occupation: 
  industry and commerce 35.1%, government and services 33%, agriculture
  27%, other 4.9% (1985 est.)

@Costa Rica, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Costa Rica 
conventional short form: 
  Costa Rica 
local long form: 
  Republica de Costa Rica 
local short form: 
  Costa Rica 
Digraph: 
  CS
Type: 
  democratic republic 
Capital: 
  San Jose 
Administrative divisions: 
  7 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Alajuela, Cartago,
  Guanacaste, Heredia, Limon, Puntarenas, San Jose
Independence: 
  15 September 1821 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 15 September (1821) 
Constitution: 
  9 November 1949
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts
  in the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Jose Maria FIGUERES Olsen (since 8 May 1994); First Vice
  President Rodrigo OREAMUNO Blanco (since 8 May 1994); Second Vice
  President Rebeca GRYNSPAN Mayufis (since 8 May 1994); election last
  held 6 February 1994 (next to be held February 1998); results -
  President FIGUERES (PLN party) 49.7%, Miquel Angel RODRIGUEZ (PUSC
  party) 47.5%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; selected by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly (Asamblea Legislativa): 
  elections last held 6 February 1994 (next to be held February 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (61 total) PLN 28, PUSC
  29, minority parties 4
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Liberation Party (PLN), Manuel AGUILAR Bonilla; Social
  Christian Unity Party (PUSC), Rafael Angel CALDERON Fournier; Marxist
  Popular Vanguard Party (PVP), Humberto VARGAS Carbonell; New Republic
  Movement (MNR), Sergio Erick ARDON Ramirez; Progressive Party (PP),
  Isaac Felipe AZOFEIFA Bolanos; People's Party of Costa Rica (PPC),
  Lenin CHACON Vargas; Radical Democratic Party (PRD), Juan Jose
  ECHEVERRIA Brealey
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Costa Rican Confederation of Democratic Workers (CCTD; Liberation
  Party affiliate); Confederated Union of Workers (CUT, Communist Party
  affiliate); Authentic Confederation of Democratic Workers (CATD,
  Communist Party affiliate); Chamber of Coffee Growers; National
  Association for Economic Development (ANFE); Free Costa Rica Movement
  (MCRL, rightwing militants); National Association of Educators (ANDE)
Member of: 
  AG (observer), BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), LORCS, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Gonzalo FACIO Segreda 
chancery: 
  2114 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-2945 
FAX: 
  (202) 265-4795 
consulate(s) general: 
  Albuquerque, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, Orlando, Philadelphia, San Antonio, San Diego,
  San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
consulate(s): 
  Austin and Raleigh 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d' Affaires Joseph BECELIA 
embassy: 
  Pavas Road, San Jose 
mailing address: 
  APO AA 34020 
telephone: 
  [506] 20-39-39 
FAX: 
  (506) 20-2305 
Flag: 
  five horizontal bands of blue (top), white, red (double width), white,
  and blue, with the coat of arms in a white disk on the hoist side of
  the red band

@Costa Rica, Economy

Overview: 
  In 1993 the economy grew at an estimated 6.5%, compared with 7.7% in
  1992 and 2.1% in 1991. Increases in agricultural production (coffee
  and bananas), nontraditional exports, and tourism are responsible for
  much of the growth. Inflation in 1993 dropped to 9% from 17% in 1992
  and 25% in 1991, an indication of basic financial stability.
  Unemployment is officially reported at 4.0%, but much underemployment
  remains.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $19.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  4% (1993); much underemployment
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.34 billion, including capital expenditures of $110 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  coffee, bananas, textiles, sugar
partners: 
  US, Germany, Italy, Guatemala, El Salvador, Netherlands, UK, France
Imports: 
  $2.9 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  raw materials, consumer goods, capital equipment, petroleum
partners: 
  US, Japan, Mexico, Guatemala, Venezuela, Germany
External debt: 
  $3.2 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 10.5% (1992); accounts for 22% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  927,000 kW
production: 
  3.612 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,130 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, textiles and clothing, construction materials,
  fertilizer, plastic products
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 19% of GDP and 70% of exports; cash commodities - coffee,
  beef, bananas, sugar; other food crops include corn, rice, beans,
  potatoes; normally self-sufficient in food except for grain; depletion
  of forest resources resulting in lower timber output
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment country for cocaine and heroin from South America;
  illicit production of cannabis on small scattered plots
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $935
  million; Communist countries (1971-89), $27 million 
Currency: 
  1 Costa Rican colon (C) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates: 
  Costa Rican colones (C) per US$1 - 150.67 (December 1993), 142.17
  (1993), 134.51 (1992), 122.43 (1991), 91.58 (1990), 81.504 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Costa Rica, Communications

Railroads: 
  950 km total, all 1.067-meter gauge; 260 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  35,536 km 
paved: 
  5,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel and earth 29,936 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  about 730 km, seasonally navigable
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 176 km 
Ports: 
  Puerto Limon, Caldera, Golfito, Moin, Puntarenas
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,878 GRT/4,506 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  184 
usable: 
  165 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  27 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  9 
Telecommunications: 
  very good domestic telephone service; 292,000 telephones; connection
  into Central American Microwave System; broadcast stations - 71 AM, no
  FM, 18 TV, 13 shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Costa Rica, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Civil Guard, Rural Assistance Guard 
note: 
  constitution prohibits armed forces
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 873,987; fit for military service 588,223; reach
  military age (18) annually 32,308 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $22 million, 0.5% of GDP (1989)


@Cote d'Ivoire

Header
Affiliation: 
  (also known as Ivory Coast) 

@Cote d'Ivoire, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Ghana and
  Liberia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  322,460 sq km 
land area: 
  318,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,110 km, Burkina 584 km, Ghana 668 km, Guinea 610 km, Liberia
  716 km, Mali 532 km 
Coastline: 
  515 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical along coast, semiarid in far north; three seasons - warm and
  dry (November to March), hot and dry (March to May), hot and wet (June
  to October)
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to undulating plains; mountains in northwest
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, diamonds, manganese, iron ore, cobalt, bauxite, copper 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  9% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  9% 
forest and woodland: 
  26% 
other: 
  52% 
Irrigated land: 
  620 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; water pollution from sewage and industrial and
  agricultural effluents
natural hazards: 
  coast has heavy surf and no natural harbors
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Tropical Timber

@Cote d'Ivoire, People

Population: 
  14,295,501 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.44% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  46.52 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  15.01 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.86 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  95 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  48.92 years 
male: 
  46.75 years 
female: 
  51.16 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.67 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ivorian(s) 
adjective: 
  Ivorian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Baoule 23%, Bete 18%, Senoufou 15%, Malinke 11%, Agni, foreign
  Africans (mostly Burkinabe and Malians, about 3 million), non-Africans
  130,000 to 330,000 (French 30,000 and Lebanese 100,000 to 300,000)
Religions: 
  indigenous 25%, Muslim 60%, Christian 12% 
Languages: 
  French (official), 60 native dialects Dioula is the most widely spoken
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  54% 
male: 
  67% 
female: 
  40% 
Labor force: 
  5.718 million 
by occupation: 
  over 85% of population engaged in agriculture, forestry, livestock
  raising; about 11% of labor force are wage earners, nearly half in
  agriculture and the remainder in government, industry, commerce, and
  professions
note: 
  54% of population of working age (1985)

@Cote d'Ivoire, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Cote d'Ivoire 
conventional short form: 
  Cote d'Ivoire 
local long form: 
  Republique de Cote d'Ivoire 
local short form: 
  Cote d'Ivoire 
former: 
  Ivory Coast 
Digraph: 
  IV
Type: 
  republic multiparty presidential regime established 1960
Capital: 
  Yamoussoukro 
note: 
  although Yamoussoukro has been the capital since 1983, Abidjan remains
  the administrative center; foreign governments, including the United
  States, maintain presence in Abidjan
Administrative divisions: 
  50 departments (departements, singular - departement); Abengourou,
  Abidjan, Aboisso, Adzope, Agboville, Agnibilckrou, Bangolo, Beoumi,
  Biankouma, Bondoukou, Bongouanou, Bouafle, Bouake, Bouna, Boundiali,
  Dabakala, Daloa, Danane, Daoukro, Dimbokro, Divo, Duekoue,
  Ferkessedougou, Gagnoa, Grand-Lahou, Guiglo, Issia, Katiola, Korhogo,
  Lakota, Man, Mankono, Mbahiakro, Odienne, Oume, Sakassou, San-Pedro,
  Sassandra, Seguela, Sinfra, Soubre, Tabou, Tanda, Tingrela, Tiassale,
  Touba, Toumodi, Vavoua, Yamoussoukro, Zuenoula
Independence: 
  7 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 7 December 
Constitution: 
  3 November 1960; has been amended numerous times, last time November
  1990
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and customary law; judicial review in
  the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Henri Konan BEDIE (since 7 December 1993) constitutional
  successor who will serve during the remainder of the term of former
  President Felix HOUPHOUET-BOIGNY who died in office after continuous
  service from November 1960 (next election October 1995)
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Kablan Daniel DUNCAN (since 10 December 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 25 November 1990 (next to be held November 1995);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (175 total) PDCI 163,
  FPI 9, PIT 1, independents 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Party of the Cote d'Ivoire (PDCI), Henri Konan BEDIE;
  Ivorian Popular Front (FPI), Laurent GBAGBO; Ivorian Worker's Party
  (PIT), Francis WODIE; Ivorian Socialist Party (PSI), Morifere BAMBA;
  over 20 smaller parties
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77,
  GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WADB, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jean-Marie KACOU-GERVAIS 
chancery: 
  2424 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 797-0300 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Hume A. HORAN 
embassy: 
  5 Rue Jesse Owens, Abidjan 
mailing address: 
  01 B. P. 1712, Abidjan 
telephone: 
  [225] 21-09-79 or 21-46-72 
FAX: 
  [225] 22-32-59 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of orange (hoist side), white, and green;
  similar to the flag of Ireland, which is longer and has the colors
  reversed - green (hoist side), white, and orange; also similar to the
  flag of Italy, which is green (hoist side), white, and red; design was
  based on the flag of France

@Cote d'Ivoire, Economy

Overview: 
  Cote d'Ivoire is among the world's largest producers and exporters of
  coffee, cocoa beans, and palm-kernel oil. Consequently, the economy is
  highly sensitive to fluctuations in international prices for coffee
  and cocoa and to weather conditions. Despite attempts by the
  government to diversify, the economy is still largely dependent on
  agriculture and related industries. The agricultural sector accounts
  for over one-third of GDP and about 80% of export earnings and employs
  about 85% of the labor force. A collapse of world cocoa and coffee
  prices in 1986 threw the economy into a recession, from which the
  country has yet to fully recover. Continuing weak prices for commodity
  exports, a bloated public-sector wage bill, and a large foreign debt
  will continue to constrain economic development, this despite the 50%
  currency devaluation in January 1994 designed to restore international
  price competitiveness. A large, non-competitive import-substitution
  sector continues to thrive under steep tariff and import quota
  barriers.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $21 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  14% (1985)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $274 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $2.8 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  cocoa 30%, coffee 20%, tropical woods 11%, petroleum, cotton, bananas,
  pineapples, palm oil, cotton
partners: 
  France, FRG, Netherlands, US, Belgium, Spain (1985)
Imports: 
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  food, capital goods, consumer goods, fuel
partners: 
  France 29%, other EC 29%, Nigeria 16%, US 4%, Japan 3% (1989)
External debt: 
  $17.3 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6% (1990); accounts for 11% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,210,000 kW
production: 
  1.97 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  150 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  foodstuffs, wood processing, oil refinery, automobile assembly,
  textiles, fertilizer, beverage
Agriculture: 
  most important sector, contributing one-third to GDP and 80% to
  exports; cash crops include coffee, cocoa beans, timber, bananas, palm
  kernels, rubber; food crops - corn, rice, manioc, sweet potatoes; not
  self-sufficient in bread grain and dairy products
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis; mostly for local consumption; some
  international drug trade; transshipment point for Southwest and
  Southeast Asian heroin to Europe and occasionally to the US
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $356 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-88), $5.2
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Cote d'Ivoire, Communications

Railroads: 
  660 km (Burkina border to Abidjan, 1.00-meter gauge, single track,
  except 25 km Abidjan-Anyama section is double track)
Highways: 
total: 
  46,600 km 
paved: 
  3,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, improved earth 32,000 km; unimproved earth
  11,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  980 km navigable rivers, canals, and numerous coastal lagoons
Ports: 
  Abidjan, San-Pedro
Merchant marine: 
  8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 92,828 GRT/ 134,606 DWT, bulk 1,
  chemical tanker 1, container 2, oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3
Airports: 
total: 
  41 
usable: 
  37 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  7 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  15 
Telecommunications: 
  well-developed by African standards but operating well below capacity;
  consists of open-wire lines and radio relay microwave links; 87,700
  telephones; broadcast stations - 3 AM, 17 FM, 13 TV, 1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station; 2 coaxial submarine cables

@Cote d'Ivoire, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary Gendarmerie, Republican Guard,
  Military Fire Group 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 3,224,673; fit for military service 1,674,127; reach
  military age (18) annually 149,991 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $200 million, 2.3% of GDP (1988)


@Croatia, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, on the Balkan Peninsula, bordering
  the Adriatic Sea, between Slovenia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
Map references: 
  Africa, Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  56,538 sq km 
land area: 
  56,410 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than West Virginia
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,028 km, Bosnia and Herzegovina 932 km, Hungary 329 km, Serbia
  and Montenegro 266 km (241 km with Serbia; 25 km with Montenego),
  Slovenia 501 km 
Coastline: 
  5,790 km (mainland 1,778 km, islands 4,012 km)
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  12 nm
exclusive fishing zone: 
  12 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Serbs have occupied UN protected areas in eastern Croatia and along
  the western Bosnia and Herzegovinian border; dispute with Slovenia
  over fishing rights in Adriatic
Climate: 
  Mediterranean and continental; continental climate predominant with
  hot summers and cold winters; mild winters, dry summers along coast
Terrain: 
  geographically diverse; flat plains along Hungarian border, low
  mountains and highlands near Adriatic coast, coastline, and islands
Natural resources: 
  oil, some coal, bauxite, low-grade iron ore, calcium, natural asphalt,
  silica, mica, clays, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  32% 
permanent crops: 
  20% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  15% 
other: 
  15% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from metallurgical plants is damaging the forests;
  coastal pollution from industrial and domestic waste; widespread
  casualties and destruction of infrastructure in border areas affected
  by civil strife
natural hazards: 
  subject to frequent and destructive earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  controls most land routes from Western Europe to Aegean Sea and
  Turkish Straits

@Croatia, People

Population: 
  4,697,614 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.07% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.27 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.54 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.6 years 
male: 
  70.14 years 
female: 
  77.26 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.65 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Croat(s) 
adjective: 
  Croatian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Croat 78%, Serb 12%, Muslim 0.9%, Hungarian 0.5%, Slovenian 0.5%,
  others 8.1% 
Religions: 
  Catholic 76.5%, Orthodox 11.1%, Slavic Muslim 1.2%, Protestant 0.4%,
  others and unknown 10.8% 
Languages: 
  Serbo-Croatian 96%, other 4% 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1,509,489 
by occupation: 
  industry and mining 37%, agriculture 16% (1981 est.), government NA%,
  other 

@Croatia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Croatia 
conventional short form: 
  Croatia 
local long form: 
  Republika Hrvatska 
local short form: 
  Hrvatska 
Digraph: 
  HR
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Zagreb 
Administrative divisions: 
  21 counties (zupanijas, zupanija - singular): Bjelovar-Bilogora, City
  of Zagreb, Dubrovnik-Neretva, Istra, Karlovac, Koprivnica-Krizevci,
  Krapina-Zagorje, Lika-Senj, Medimurje, Osijek-Baranja,
  Pozega-Slavonija, Primorje-Gorski Kotar, Sibenik, Sisak-Moslavina,
  Slavonski Brod-Posavina, Split-Dalmatia, Varazdin,
  Virovitica-Podravina, Vukovar-Srijem, Zadar-Knin, Zagreb
Independence: 
  NA June 1991 (from Yugoslavia)
National holiday: 
  Statehood Day, 30 May (1990) 
Constitution: 
  adopted on 2 December 1990
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  16 years of age, if employed;  18 years of age, universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Franjo TUDJMAN (since 30 May 1990); election last held 4
  August 1992 (next to be held NA 1995); Franjo TUDJMAN reelected with
  about 56% of the vote; his opponent Dobroslav PARAGA got 5% of the
  vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Nikica VALENTIC (since 3 April 1993); Deputy Prime
  Ministers Mato GRANIC (since 8 September 1992), Ivica KOSTOVIC (since
  NA), Vladimir SEKS (since September 1992), Borislav SKEGRO (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral parliament Assembly (Sabor)
House of Districts (Zupanije Dom): 
  elections last held 7 and 21 February 1993 (next to be held NA
  February 1997); seats - (68 total; 63 elected, 5 presidentially
  appointed) HDZ 37, HSLS 16, HSS 5, Istrian Democratic Assembly 3,
  SPH-SDP 1, HNS 1
House of Representatives (Predstavnicke Dom): 
  elections last held 2 August 1992 (next to be held NA August 1996);
  seats - (138 total) HDZ 85, HSLS 14, SPH-SDP 11, HNS 6, Dalmatian
  Action/Istrian Democratic Assembly/ Rijeka Democratic Alliance
  coalition 6, HSP 5, HSS 3, SNS 3, independents 5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), Stjepan MESIC, chairman of the
  executive council; Croatian People's Party (HNS), Savka
  DABCEVIC-KUCAR, president; Serbian People's Party (SNS), Milan DUKIC;
  Croatian Party of Rights (HSP), leader NA; Croatian Social Liberal
  Party (HSLS), Drazen BUDISA, president; Croatian Peasant Party (HSS),
  leader NA; Dalmatian Action/Istrian Democratic Assembly/Rijecka
  Democratic Alliance coalition; Social Democratic Party of
  Croatia-Party of Democratic Changes (SPH-SDP), Ivica RACAN
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  CE (guest), CEI, CSCE, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM
  (observer), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Petr A. SARCEVIC 
chancery: 
  (temporary) 236 Massachusetts Avenue NE, Washington, DC 20002 
telephone: 
  (202) 543-5580 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Peter W. GALBRAITH 
embassy: 
  Andrije Hebranga 2, Zagreb 
mailing address: 
  US Embassy, Zagreb, Unit 1345, APO AE 09213-1345 
telephone: 
  [385] (41) 444-800 
FAX: 
  [385] (41) 45 85 85 
Flag: 
  red, white, and blue horizontal bands with Croatian coat of arms (red
  and white checkered)

@Croatia, Economy

Overview: 
  Before the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the republic of Croatia, after
  Slovenia, was the most prosperous and industrialized area, with a per
  capita output roughly comparable to that of Portugal and perhaps
  one-third above the Yugoslav average. At present, Croatian Serb
  Nationalists control approximately one-third of the Croatian
  territory, and one of the overriding determinants of Croatia's
  long-term political and economic prospects will be the resolution of
  this territorial dispute. Croatia faces monumental economic problems
  stemming from: the legacy of longtime Communist mismanagement of the
  economy; large foreign debt; damage during the fighting to bridges,
  factories, power lines, buildings, and houses; the large refugee
  population, both Croatian and Bosnian; and the disruption of economic
  ties to Serbia and the other former Yugoslav republics, as well as
  within its own territory. At the minimum, extensive Western aid and
  investment, especially in the tourist and oil industries, would seem
  necessary to salvage a desperate economic situation. However, peace
  and political stability must come first; only then will recent
  government moves toward a "market-friendly" economy reverse the sharp
  drop in output. As of May 1994, fighting continues among Croats,
  Serbs, and Muslims, and national boundaries and final political
  arrangements are still in doubt.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $21.8 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -19% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,500 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  26% monthly average (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  21% (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $3.9 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 30%, other manufacturers 37%,
  chemicals 11%, food and live animals 9%, raw materials 6.5%, fuels and
  lubricants 5% (1990)
partners: 
  EC countries, Slovenia
Imports: 
  $4.7 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 21%, fuels and lubricants 19%, food
  and live animals 16%, chemicals 14%, manufactured goods 13%,
  miscellaneous manufactured articles 9%, raw materials 6.5%, beverages
  and tobacco 1% (1990)
partners: 
  EC countries, Slovenia, FSU countries
External debt: 
  $2.6 billion (December 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -5.9% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,570,000 kW
production: 
  11.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,400 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  chemicals and plastics, machine tools, fabricated metal, electronics,
  pig iron and rolled steel products, aluminum reduction, paper, wood
  products (including furniture), building materials (including cement),
  textiles, shipbuilding, petroleum and petroleum refining, food
  processing and beverages
Agriculture: 
  Croatia normally produces a food surplus; most agricultural land in
  private hands and concentrated in Croat-majority districts in Slavonia
  and Istria; much of Slavonia's land has been put out of production by
  fighting; wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflowers, alfalfa, and clover
  are main crops in Slavonia; central Croatian highlands are less
  fertile but support cereal production, orchards, vineyards, livestock
  breeding, and dairy farming; coastal areas and offshore islands grow
  olives, citrus fruits, and vegetables
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 Croatian dinar (CD) = 100 paras; a new currency, the kuna, replaced
  the dinar on 30 May 1994
Exchange rates: 
  Croatian dinar per US $1 - 6,544 (January 1994), 3,637 (15 July 1993),
  60.00 (April 1992)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Croatia, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,592 km of standard guage (1.435 m) of which 864 km are electrified
  (1992); note - disrupted by territorial dispute
Highways: 
total: 
  32,071 km 
paved: 
  23,305 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 8,439 km; earth 327 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  785 km perennially navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 670 km; petroleum products 20 km; natural gas 310 km (1992);
  note - now disrupted because of territorial dispute
Ports: 
  coastal - Omisalj (oil), Ploce, Rijeka, Split; inland - Osijek,
  Slavonski Samac, Vukovar, Zupanja
Merchant marine: 
  28 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 108,194 GRT/131,880 DWT, cargo
  18, container 1, oil tanker 1, passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 3 
note: 
  also controlled by Croatian shipowners are 151 ships (1,000 GRT or
  over) under flags of convenience - primarily Malta and St. Vincent -
  totaling 2,221,931 GRT/3,488,263 DWT; includes cargo 60, roll-on/
  roll-off 8, refrigerated cargo 4, container 12, multifunction large
  load carriers 3, bulk 45, oil tanker 9, liquified gas 1, chemical
  tanker 4, service vessel 5
Airports: 
total: 
  75 
usable: 
  70 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  16 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
Telecommunications: 
  350,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 14 AM, 8 FM, 12 (2 repeaters)
  TV; 1,100,000 radios; 1,027,000 TVs; satellite ground stations - none

@Croatia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Naval Forces, Air and Air Defense Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,182,767; fit for military service 946,010; reach
  military age (19) annually 33,166 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  337 billion-393 billion Croatian dinars, NA% of GDP (1993 est.); note
  - conversion of defense expenditures into US dollars using the current
  exchange rate could produce misleading results


@Cuba, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the northern Caribbean Sea, 145 km south of Key West
  (Florida)
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  110,860 sq km 
land area: 
  110,860 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Pennsylvania
Land boundaries: 
  total 29 km, US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay 29 km 
note: 
  Guantanamo is leased and as such remains part of Cuba
Coastline: 
  3,735 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased to US and only mutual
  agreement or US abandonment of the area can terminate the lease
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by trade winds; dry season (November to April);
  rainy season (May to October)
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to rolling plains with rugged hills and mountains in the
  southeast
Natural resources: 
  cobalt, nickel, iron ore, copper, manganese, salt, timber, silica,
  petroleum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  23% 
permanent crops: 
  6% 
meadows and pastures: 
  23% 
forest and woodland: 
  17% 
other: 
  31% 
Irrigated land: 
  8,960 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  overhunting threatens wildlife populations; deforestation
natural hazards: 
  averages one hurricane every other year
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  largest country in Caribbean

@Cuba, People

Population: 
  11,064,344 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.95% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.59 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.52 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.54 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  10.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.89 years 
male: 
  74.72 years 
female: 
  79.18 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cuban(s) 
adjective: 
  Cuban 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mulatto 51%, white 37%, black 11%, Chinese 1% 
Religions: 
  nominally Roman Catholic 85% prior to Castro assuming power
Languages: 
  Spanish 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  94% 
male: 
  95% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  4,620,800 economically active population (1988); 3,578,800 in state
  sector
by occupation: 
  services and government 30%, industry 22%, agriculture 20%, commerce
  11%, construction 10%, transportation and communications 7% (June
  1990)

@Cuba, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Cuba 
conventional short form: 
  Cuba 
local long form: 
  Republica de Cuba 
local short form: 
  Cuba 
Digraph: 
  CU
Type: 
  Communist state 
Capital: 
  Havana
Administrative divisions: 
  14 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia) and 1 special
  municipality* (municipio especial); Camaguey, Ciego de Avila,
  Cienfuegos, Ciudad de La Habana, Granma, Guantanamo, Holguin, Isla de
  la Juventud*, La Habana, Las Tunas, Matanzas, Pinar del Rio, Sancti
  Spiritus, Santiago de Cuba, Villa Clara
Independence: 
  20 May 1902 (from Spain 10 December 1898; administered by the US from
  1898 to 1902)
National holiday: 
  Rebellion Day, 26 July (1953) 
Constitution: 
  24 February 1976
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish and American law, with large elements of Communist
  legal theory; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  16 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President of the Council of State and President of the Council of
  Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (Prime Minister from February 1959 until 24
  February 1976 when office was abolished; President since 2 December
  1976);  First Vice President of the Council of State and First Vice
  President of the Council of Ministers Gen. Raul CASTRO Ruz (since 2
  December 1976) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; proposed by the president of the Council of
  State, appointed by the National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly of People's Power: 
  (Asamblea Nacional del Poder Popular) elections last held February
  1993; seats - 589 total, indirectly elected from slates approved by
  special candidacy commissions
Judicial branch: 
  People's Supreme Court (Tribunal Supremo Popular) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  only party - Cuban Communist Party (PCC), Fidel CASTRO Ruz, first
  secretary
Member of: 
  CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, ICAO, IFAD, ILO, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA
  (observer), LORCS, NAM, OAS (excluded from formal participation since
  1962), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Principal Officer Alfonso FRAGA Perez (since August 1992) represented
  by the Cuban Interests Section of the Swiss Embassy in Washington, DC
chancery: 
  2630 and 2639 16th Street NW, US Interests Section, Swiss Embassy,
  Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 797-8518 or 8519, 8520, 8609, 8610 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Principal Officer Joseph SULLIVAN 
US Interests Section: 
  USINT, Swiss Embassy, Calzada Entre L y M, Vedado Seccion, Havana 
mailing address: 
  use street address 
telephone: 
  33-3351 or 33-3543 
FAX: 
  no service available at this time 
note: 
  protecting power in Cuba is Switzerland - US Interests Section, Swiss
  Embassy
Flag: 
  five equal horizontal bands of blue (top and bottom) alternating with
  white; a red equilateral triangle based on the hoist side bears a
  white five-pointed star in the center

@Cuba, Economy

Overview: 
  Cuba's heavily statist economy remains in a severe depression as a
  result of the loss of massive amounts of economic aid from the former
  Soviet Bloc. In 1989-93, GDP declined by about 40% and import
  capability fell by about 80%. Reduced imports of fuel, spare parts,
  and chemicals combined with rainy weather to cut the production of
  sugar - the country's top export - from 7 million tons in 1992 to 4.3
  million tons in 1993, causing a loss of more than $400 million in
  export revenue. The government implemented several measures designed
  to stem the economic decline, e.g., legalizing the use of foreign
  currency by Cuban citizens in August 1993 in an attempt to increase
  remittances of foreign exchange from abroad. Authorities in September
  1993 began permitting self-employment in over 100 mostly service
  occupations. Also in September the government broke up many state
  farms into smaller, more autonomous cooperative units in an attempt to
  increase worker incentives and boost depressed food production levels.
  Fuel shortages persisted throughout 1993; draft animals and bicycles
  continued to replace motor-driven vehicles, and the use of electricity
  by households and factories was cut from already low levels. With the
  help of foreign investment, tourism has been one bright spot in the
  economy, with arrivals and earnings reaching record highs in 1993.
  Government officials have expressed guarded optimism for 1994, as the
  country struggles to achieve sustainable economic growth at a
  much-reduced standard of living.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $13.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -10% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,250 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $12.46 billion 
expenditures: 
  $14.45 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1990 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  sugar, nickel, shellfish, tobacco, medical products, citrus, coffee
partners: 
  Russia 28%, Canada 9%, China 5%, Ukraine 5%, Japan 4%, Spain 4% (1993
  est.)
Imports: 
  $1.7 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum, food, machinery, chemicals
partners: 
  Venezuela 20%, China 9%, Spain 9%, Mexico 7%, Italy 4%, Canada 7%,
  France 8% (1993 est.)
External debt: 
  $6.8 billion (convertible currency, July 1989)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,889,000 kW
production: 
  16.248 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,500 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  sugar milling and refining, petroleum refining, food and tobacco
  processing, textiles, chemicals, paper and wood products, metals
  (particularly nickel), cement, fertilizers, consumer goods,
  agricultural machinery
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 11% of GNP (including fishing and forestry); key
  commercial crops - sugarcane, tobacco, and citrus fruits; other
  products - coffee, rice, potatoes, meat, beans; world's largest sugar
  exporter; not self-sufficient in food (excluding sugar); sector hurt
  by growing shortages of fuels and parts
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine bound for the US
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $710 million; Communist countries (1970-89), $18.5 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Cuban peso (Cu$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Cuban pesos (Cu$) per US$1 - 1.0000 (non-convertible, official rate,
  linked to the US dollar)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Cuba, Communications

Railroads: 
  12,795 km total; Cuban National Railways operates 5,053 km of
  1.435-meter gauge track, including 151.7 km electrified; in addition,
  sugar plantation lines consist of 7,742 km of 0.914-meter and
  1.435-meter gauge track
Highways: 
total: 
  26,477 km 
paved: 
  14,477 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel or earth 12,000 km (1989)
Inland waterways: 
  240 km
Ports: 
  Cienfuegos, La Habana, Mariel, Matanzas, Santiago de Cuba; 7
  secondary, 35 minor
Merchant marine: 
  64 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 444,038 GRT/627,741 DWT, bulk 2,
  cargo 36, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas 4, oil tanker 10, passenger
  cargo 1, refrigerated cargo 10 
note: 
  Cuba beneficially owns an additional 34 ships (1,000 GRT and over)
  totaling 529,090 DWT under the registry of Panama, Cyprus, and Malta
Airports: 
total: 
  187 
usable: 
  167 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  73 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  12 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  19 
Telecommunications: 
  among the world's least developed telephone systems; 229,000
  telephones; telephone density - 20.7 per 1,000 persons; broadcast
  stations - 150 AM, 5 FM, 58 TV; 1,530,000 TVs; 2,140,000 radios; 1
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Cuba, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Revolutionary Armed Forces (FAR) - including ground forces,
  Revolutionary Navy (MGR), Air and Air Defense Force (DAAFAR),
  Territorial Militia Troops (MTT), Youth Labor Army (EJT), and Interior
  Ministry Border Guard Troops 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 3,064,898; females age 15-49 3,088,810; males fit for
  military service 1,907,396; females fit for military service
  1,927,306; males reach military age (17) annually 81,536 (1994 est.);
  females reach military age (17) annually 78,612 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - approx. $600 million, 4% of GSP (gross
  social product) in 1993 was for defense
Note: 
  Moscow, for decades the key military supporter and supplier of Cuba,
  cut off military aid by 1993


@Cyprus, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, in the eastern Mediterreanean Sea, 97 km west of Syria
  and 64 km west of Turkey
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  9,250 sq km 
land area: 
  9,240 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.7 times the size of Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  648 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  1974 hostilities divided the island into two de facto autonomous
  areas, a Greek area controlled by the Cypriot Government (60% of the
  island's land area) and a Turkish-Cypriot area (35% of the island),
  that are separated by a narrow UN buffer zone; in addition, there are
  two UK sovereign base areas (about 5% of the island's land area)
Climate: 
  temperate, Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and cool, wet winters
Terrain: 
  central plain with mountains to north and south
Natural resources: 
  copper, pyrites, asbestos, gypsum, timber, salt, marble, clay earth
  pigment 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  40% 
permanent crops: 
  7% 
meadows and pastures: 
  10% 
forest and woodland: 
  18% 
other: 
  25% 
Irrigated land: 
  350 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water resource problems (no natural reservoir catchments, seasonal
  disparity in rainfall, and most potable resources concentrated in the
  Turkish Cypriot area); water pollution from sewage and industrial
  wastes; coastal degradation; loss of wildlife habitats from
  urbanization
natural hazards: 
  moderate earthquake activity
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but
  not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Cyprus, People

Population: 
  730,084 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.91% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.69 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.61 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.22 years 
male: 
  73.97 years 
female: 
  78.58 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.32 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Cypriot(s) 
adjective: 
  Cypriot 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Greek 78%, Turkish 18%, other 4% 
Religions: 
  Greek Orthodox 78%, Muslim 18%, Maronite, Armenian, Apostolic, and
  other 4% 
Languages: 
  Greek, Turkish, English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1987 est.)
total population: 
  94% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  91% 
Labor force: 
Greek area: 
  285,500 
by occupation: 
  services 57%, industry 29%, agriculture 14% (1992)
Turkish area: 
  75,000 
by occupation: 
  services 52%, industry 22%, agriculture 26% (1992)

@Cyprus, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Cyprus 
conventional short form: 
  Cyprus 
Digraph: 
  CY
Type: 
  republic 
note: 
  a disaggregation of the two ethnic communities inhabiting the island
  began after the outbreak of communal strife in 1963; this separation
  was further solidified following the Turkish invasion of the island in
  July 1974, which gave the Turkish Cypriots de facto control in the
  north; Greek Cypriots control the only internationally recognized
  government; on 15 November 1983 Turkish Cypriot President Rauf
  DENKTASH declared independence and the formation of a "Turkish
  Republic of Northern Cyprus" (TRNC), which has been recognized only by
  Turkey; both sides publicly call for the resolution of intercommunal
  differences and creation of a new federal system of government
Capital: 
  Nicosia 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 districts; Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca, Limassol, Nicosia, Paphos
Independence: 
  16 August 1960 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 October (15 November (1983) is celebrated as
  Independence Day in the Turkish area) 
Constitution: 
  16 August 1960; negotiations to create the basis for a new or revised
  constitution to govern the island and to better relations between
  Greek and Turkish Cypriots have been held intermittently; in 1975
  Turkish Cypriots created their own Constitution and governing bodies
  within the "Turkish Federated State of Cyprus," which was renamed the
  "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus" in 1983; a new Constitution for
  the Turkish area passed by referendum in 5 May 1985
Legal system: 
  based on common law, with civil law modifications
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Glafkos CLERIDES (since 28 February 1993); election last
  held 14 February 1993 (next to be held February 1998); results -
  Glafkos CLERIDES 50.3%, George VASSILIOU 49.7%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed jointly by the president and
  vice-president
note: 
  Rauf R. DENKTASH has been president of the Turkish area since 13
  February 1975; Hakki ATUN has been prime minister of the Turkish area
  since 1 January 1994; there is a Council of Ministers (cabinet) in the
  Turkish area
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Representatives (Vouli Antiprosopon): 
  elections last held 19 May 1991 (next to be held NA); results - DISY
  35.8%, AKEL (Communist) 30.6%, DIKO 19.5%, EDEK 10.9%; others 3.2%;
  seats - (56 total) DISY 20, AKEL (Communist) 18, DIKO 11, EDEK 7
Turkish Area: Assembly of the Republic (Cumhuriyet Meclisi):
  elections last held 12 December 1993 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (50 total) UBP (conservative) 17,
  DP 15, CTP 13, TKP 5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court; note - there is also a Supreme Court in the Turkish
  area
Political parties and leaders: 
Greek Cypriot: 
  Progressive Party of the Working People (AKEL, Communist Party),
  Dimitrios CHRISTOFIAS; Democratic Rally (DISY), John MATSIS;
  Democratic Party (DIKO), Spyros KYPRIANOU; United Democratic Union of
  the Center (EDEK), Vassos LYSSARIDIS; Socialist Democratic Renewal
  Movement (ADISOK), Mikhalis PAPAPETROU; Liberal Party, Nikos ROLANDIS;
  Free Democrats, George VASSILIOU
Turkish area: 
  National Unity Party (UBP), Dervis EROGLU; Communal Liberation Party
  (TKP), Mustafa AKINCI; Republican Turkish Party (CTP), Ozker OZGUR;
  New Cyprus Party (YKP), Alpay DURDURAN; Social Democratic Party (SDP),
  Ergun VEHBI; New Birth Party (YDP), Ali Ozkan ALTINISHIK; Free
  Democratic Party (HDP), Ismet KOTAK; National Struggle Party (MSP),
  Zorlu TORE; Unity and Sovereignty Party (USP), Arif Salih KIRDAG;
  Democratic Party (DP), Hakki ATUN; Fatherland Party (VP), Orhan UCOK
note: 
  CTP, TKP, and YDP joined in the coalition Democratic Struggle Party
  (DMP) for the 22 April 1990 legislative election; the CTP and TKP
  boycotted the by-election of 13 October 1991, in which 12 seats were
  at stake; the DMP was dissolved after the 1990 election
Other political or pressure groups: 
  United Democratic Youth Organization (EDON, Communist controlled);
  Union of Cyprus Farmers (EKA, Communist controlled); Cyprus Farmers
  Union (PEK, pro-West); Pan-Cyprian Labor Federation (PEO, Communist
  controlled); Confederation of Cypriot Workers (SEK, pro-West);
  Federation of Turkish Cypriot Labor Unions (Turk-Sen); Confederation
  of Revolutionary Labor Unions (Dev-Is)
Member of: 
  C, CCC, CE, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Andreas JACOVIDES 
chancery: 
  2211 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-5772 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
note: 
  Representative of the Turkish area in the US is Namik KORMAN, office
  at 1667 K Street NW, Washington DC, telephone (202) 887-6198
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard BOUCHER 
embassy: 
  corner of Metochiou and Ploutarchou Streets, Nicosia 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09836 
telephone: 
  [357] (2) 476100 
FAX: 
  [357] (2) 465944 
Flag: 
  white with a copper-colored silhouette of the island (the name Cyprus
  is derived from the Greek word for copper) above two green crossed
  olive branches in the center of the flag; the branches symbolize the
  hope for peace and reconciliation between the Greek and Turkish
  communities
note: 
  the Turkish Cypriot flag has a horizontal red stripe at the top and
  bottom with a red crescent and red star on a white field

@Cyprus, Economy

Overview: 
  The Greek Cypriot economy is small, diversified, and prosperous.
  Industry contributes 16% to GDP and employs 29% of the labor force,
  while the service sector contributes 60% to GDP and employs 57% of the
  labor force. An average 6.8% rise in real GDP between 1986 and 1990
  was temporarily checked in 1991, because of the adverse effects of the
  Gulf War on tourism. Economic growth surged again in 1992, bolstered
  by strong foreign and domestic demand. As the economy gained momentum,
  however, it began to overheat; inflation reached 6.5%. The economy has
  likely recorded a sharp drop in growth in 1993, due to the recession
  in Western Europe, Cyprus' main trading partner, but probably will
  pick up again in 1994. The Turkish Cypriot economy has less than
  one-third the per capita GDP in the south. Because it is recognized
  only by Turkey, it has had much difficulty arranging foreign
  financing, and foreign firms have hesitated to invest there. The
  economy remains heavily dependent on agriculture, which employs more
  than one-quarter of the workforce. Moreover, because the Turkish lira
  is legal tender, the Turkish Cypriot economy has suffered the same
  high inflation as mainland Turkey. To compensate for the economy's
  weakness, Turkey provides direct and indirect aid to nearly every
  sector; financial support has reached about one-third of Turkish
  Cypriot GDP.
National product: 
Greek area: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6.7 billion (1992)
Turkish area: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $550 million (1992)
National product real growth rate: 
Greek area: 
  8.2% (1992)
Turkish area: 
  7.3% (1992)
National product per capita: 
Greek area: 
  $11,390 (1992)
Turkish area: 
  $3,130 (1992)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
Greek area: 
  6.5% (1992)
Turkish area: 
  63.4% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
Greek area: 
  1.8% (1992)
Turkish area: 
  1.2% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  Greek area - $1.7 billion 
  Turkish area -  $273 million 
expenditures: 
  Greek area - $2.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $350
  million 
  Turkish area - $360 million, including capital expenditures of $78
  million (1994)
Exports: 
  $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  citrus, potatoes, grapes, wine, cement, clothing and shoes
partners: 
  UK 19%, Greece 8%, Lebanon 2%, Egypt 7%
Imports: 
  $3.3 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  consumer goods, petroleum and lubricants, food and feed grains,
  machinery
partners: 
  UK 11%, Japan 11%, Italy 10%, Germany 9%, US 8%
External debt: 
  $1.6 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4% (1993 est.); accounts for 16.0% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  620,000 kW
production: 
  1.77 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,530 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  food, beverages, textiles, chemicals, metal products, tourism, wood
  products
Agriculture: 
  contributes 7% to GDP and employs 26% of labor force in the south;
  major crops - potatoes, vegetables, barley, grapes, olives, citrus
  fruits; vegetables and fruit provide 25% of export revenues
Illicit drugs: 
  transit point for heroin via air routes and container traffic to
  Europe, especially from Lebanon and Turkey
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $292 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $250
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $62 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $24 million 
Currency: 
  1 Cypriot pound (#C) = 100 cents; 1 Turkish lira (TL) = 100 kurus
Exchange rates: 
  Cypriot pounds per $US1 - 0.5148 (December 1993), 0.4970 (1993),
  0.4502 (1992), 0.4615 (1991), 0.4572 (1990), 0.4933 (1989); Turkish
  liras (TL) per US$1 - 15,196.1 (January 1994), 10,983.3 (1993),
  6,872.4 (1992), 4,171.8 (1991), 2,608.6 (1990), 2,121.7 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Cyprus, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  10,780 km 
paved: 
  5,170 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 5,610 km 
Ports: 
  Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca, Limassol, Paphos
Merchant marine: 
  1,399 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 22,743,484 GRT/39,874,985
  DWT, bulk 469, cargo 496, chemical tanker 27, combination bulk 48,
  combination ore/oil 32, container 82, liquefied gas 3, multifunction
  large load carrier 4, oil tanker 122, passenger 4, passenger-cargo 2,
  railcar carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 67, roll-on/roll-off cargo 24,
  short-sea passenger 12, specialized tanker 3, vehicle carrier 3 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry; Cuba owns 26 of these ships, Russia
  owns 61, Latvia owns 7, Croatia owns 2, and Romania owns 4
Airports: 
total: 
  14 
usable: 
  14 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent in both the area controlled by the Cypriot Government (Greek
  area), and in the Turkish-Cypriot administered area; 210,000
  telephones; largely open-wire and microwave radio relay; broadcast
  stations - 11 AM, 8 FM, 1 (34 repeaters) TV in Greek sector and 2 AM,
  6 FM and 1 TV in Turkish sector; international service by tropospheric
  scatter, 3 submarine cables, and satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and EUTELSAT earth stations

@Cyprus, Defense Forces

Branches: 
Greek area: 
  Greek Cypriot National Guard (GCNG; including air and naval elements),
  Greek Cypriot Police 
Turkish area: 
  Turkish Cypriot Security Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 186,807; fit for military service 128,444; reach
  military age (18) annually 5,233 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $407 million, 6.5% of GDP (1993)


@Czech Republic, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between Germany and Slovakia
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  78,703 sq km 
land area: 
  78,645 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than South Carolina
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,880 km, Austria 362 km, Germany 646 km, Poland 658 km,
  Slovakia 214 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Liechtenstein claims l,606 square miles of Czech territory confiscated
  from its royal family in 1918; Sudeten German claims for restitution
  of property confiscated in connection with their expulsion after World
  War II versus the Czech Republic claims that restitution does not
  proceed before February 1948 when the Communists seized power;
  unresolved property issues with Slovakia over redistribution of
  property of the former Czechoslovak federal government
Climate: 
  temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters
Terrain: 
  two main regions: Bohemia in the west, consisting of rolling plains,
  hills, and plateaus surrounded by low mountains; and Moravia in the
  east, consisting of very hilly country
Natural resources: 
  hard coal, soft coal, kaolin, clay, graphite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air and water pollution in areas of northwest Bohemia centered around
  Zeplica and in northern Moravia around Ostrava presents health
  hazards; acid rain damaging forests
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol
Note: 
  landlocked; strategically located astride some of oldest and most
  significant land routes in Europe; Moravian Gate is a traditional
  military corridor between the North European Plain and the Danube in
  central Europe

@Czech Republic, People

Population: 
  10,408,280 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.21% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.23 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.14 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  9.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.08 years 
male: 
  69.38 years 
female: 
  76.99 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.84 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Czech(s) 
adjective: 
  Czech 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Czech 94.4%, Slovak 3%, Polish 0.6%, German 0.5%, Gypsy 0.3%,
  Hungarian 0.2%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  atheist 39.8%, Roman Catholic 39.2%, Protestant 4.6%, Orthodox 3%,
  other 13.4% 
Languages: 
  Czech, Slovak 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  5.389 million 
by occupation: 
  industry 37.9%, agriculture 8.1%, construction 8.8%, communications
  and other 45.2% (1990)

@Czech Republic, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Czech Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Czech Republic 
local long form: 
  Ceska Republika 
local short form: 
  Cechy 
Digraph: 
  EZ
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Prague 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 regions (kraje, kraj - singular); Jihocesky, Jihomoravsky, Praha,
  Severocesky, Severomoravsky, Stredocesky, Vychodocesky, Zapadocesky
Independence: 
  1 January 1993 (from Czechoslovakia)
National holiday: 
  National Liberation Day, 9 May; Founding of the Republic, 28 October 
Constitution: 
  ratified 16 December 1992; effective 1 January 1993
Legal system: 
  civil law system based on Austro-Hungarian codes; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; legal code modified to bring it in line
  with Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
  obligations and to expunge Marxist-Leninist legal theory
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Vaclav HAVEL (since 26 January 1993); election last held 26
  January 1993 (next to be held NA January 1998); results - Vaclav HAVEL
  elected by the National Council
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Vaclav KLAUS (since NA June 1992); Deputy Prime
  Ministers Ivan KOCARNIK, Josef LUX, Jan KALVODA (since NA June 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president on recommendation of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Council (Narodni rada)
Senate: 
  elections not yet held; seats (81 total)
Chamber of Deputies: 
  elections last held 5-6 June 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (200 total) Civic Democratic
  Party/Christian Democratic Party 76, Left Bloc 35, Czech Social
  Democratic Party 16, Liberal Social Union 16, Christian Democratic
  Union/Czech People's Party 15, Assembly for the Republic/Republican
  Party 14, Civic Democratic Alliance 14, Movement for Self-Governing
  Democracy for Moravia and Silesia 14
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Civic Democratic Party (ODS), Vaclav KLAUS, chairman; Christian
  Democratic Union-Czech People's Party (KDU-CSL), Josef LUX, chairman;
  Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA), Jan KALVODA, chairman; Christian
  Democratic Party (KDS), Ivan PILIP, chairman; Czech Social Democratic
  Party, Milos ZEMAN, chairman; Czech-Moravian Center Party, Jan KYCER,
  chairman; Liberal Social Union (LSU), Frantisek TRNKA; Communist Party
  of Bohemia/Moravia (KSCM), Miroslav GREBENICEK, chairman; Association
  for the Republic - Republican Party, Miroslav SLADEK, chairman; Left
  Bloc, Marie STIBOROVA, chairman
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Left Bloc; Liberal Party; Czech-Moravian Chamber of Trade Unions
Member of: 
  BIS, CCC, CE (guest), CEI, CERN, COCOM (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, ECE,
  FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IFCTU, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, NACC, NSG,
  PCA, UN (as of 8 January 1993), UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNOMIG, UNOMOZ, UNPROFOR, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Michael ZANTOVSKY 
chancery: 
  3900 Spring of Freedom Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 363-6315 or 6316 
FAX: 
  (202) 966-8540 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Adrian A. BASORA 
embassy: 
  Trziste 15, 11801, Prague 1 
mailing address: 
  Unit 25402; APO AE 09213 
telephone: 
  [42] (2) 251-0847 
FAX: 
  [42] (2) 531-193 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red with a blue
  isosceles triangle based on the hoist side (almost identical to the
  flag of the former Czechoslovakia)

@Czech Republic, Economy

Overview: 
  The dissolution of Czechoslovakia into two independent nation states -
  the Czech Republic and Slovakia - on 1 January 1993 has complicated
  the task of moving toward a more open and decentralized economy. The
  old Czechoslovakia, even though highly industrialized by East European
  standards, suffered from an aging capital plant, lagging technology,
  and a deficiency in energy and many raw materials. In January 1991,
  approximately one year after the end of communist control of Eastern
  Europe, the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic launched a sweeping
  program to convert its almost entirely state-owned and controlled
  economy to a market system. In 1991-92 these measures resulted in
  privatization of some medium- and small-scale economic activity and
  the setting of more than 90% of prices by the market - but at a cost
  in inflation, unemployment, and lower output. For Czechoslovakia as a
  whole inflation in 1991 was roughly 50% and output fell 15%. In 1992,
  in the Czech lands, inflation dropped to an estimated 12.5% and GDP
  was down a more moderate 5%. In 1993, Czech aggregate output remained
  unchanged, prices rose about 19%, and unemployment hovered above 3%;
  exports to Slovakia fell roughly 30%. An estimated 40% of the economy
  was privately owned. In 1994, Prague expects 2% to 3% growth in GDP,
  roughly 9% inflation, and 5% unemployment. Economic growth in 1994 is
  less important than continued economic restructuring; a mere 1% growth
  would be noteworthy if restructuring is accompanied by rising
  unemployment and enterprise bankruptcies.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $75 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $7,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  19% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  3.3% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $11.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $11.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $12.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment, chemicals,
  fuels, minerals, and metals
partners: 
  Germany, Slovakia, Poland, Austria, Hungary, Italy, France, US, UK,
  CIS republics
Imports: 
  $12.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, fuels and lubricants, manfactured
  goods, raw materials, chemicals, agricultural products
partners: 
  Slovakia, CIS republics, Germany, Austria, Poland, Switzerland,
  Hungary, UK, Italy
External debt: 
  $8.6 billion (October 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -5.5% (December 1993 over December 1992)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  16,500,000 kW
production: 
  62.2 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,030 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  fuels, ferrous metallurgy, machinery and equipment, coal, motor
  vehicles, glass, armaments
Agriculture: 
  largely self-sufficient in food production; diversified crop and
  livestock production, including grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops,
  fruit, hogs, cattle, and poultry; exporter of forest products
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and Latin American
  cocaine to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  the former Czechoslovakia was a donor - $4.2 billion in bilateral aid
  to non-Communist less developed countries (1954-89)
Currency: 
  1 koruna (Kc) = 100 haleru
Exchange rates: 
  koruny (Kcs) per US$1 - 30.122 (January 1994), 29.153 (1993), 28.26
  (1992), 29.53 (1991), 17.95 (1990), 15.05 (1989)
note: 
  values before 1993 reflect Czechoslovak exchange rates
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Czech Republic, Communications

Railroads: 
  9,434 km total (1988)
Highways: 
total: 
  55,890 km (1988)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Inland waterways: 
  NA km; the Elbe (Labe) is the principal river
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 5,400 km 
Ports: 
  coastal outlets are in Poland (Gdynia, Gdansk, Szczecin), Croatia
  (Rijeka), Slovenia (Koper), Germany (Hamburg, Rostock); principal
  river ports are Prague on the Vltava, Decin on the Elbe (Labe)
Merchant marine: 
  18 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 225,934 GRT/350,330 DWT, bulk 7,
  cargo 11 
Airports: 
total: 
  155 
usable: 
  123 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  27 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  17 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  52 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  NA

@Czech Republic, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Civil Defense, Railroad Units 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,747,126; fit for military service 2,091,532; reach
  military age (18) annually 93,342 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  23 billion koruny, NA% of GNP (1993 est.); note - conversion of
  defense expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate
  could produce misleading results


@Denmark, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe, bordering the North Sea on a peninsula
  north of Germany
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  43,070 sq km 
land area: 
  42,370 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Massachusetts
note: 
  includes the island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea and the rest of
  metropolitan Denmark, but excludes the Faroe Islands and Greenland
Land boundaries: 
  total 68 km, Germany 68 km 
Coastline: 
  3,379 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  4 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  Rockall continental shelf dispute involving Iceland, Ireland, and the
  UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall
  area); dispute between Denmark and Norway over maritime boundary in
  Arctic Ocean between Greenland and Jan Mayen has been settled by the
  International Court of Justice
Climate: 
  temperate; humid and overcast; mild, windy winters and cool summers
Terrain: 
  low and flat to gently rolling plains
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, fish, salt, limestone 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  61% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  12% 
other: 
  21% 
Irrigated land: 
  4,300 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution; nitrogen and phosphorus pollution of the North Sea;
  drinking and surface water becoming polluted from animal wastes
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  controls Danish Straits linking Baltic and North Seas; about
  one-quarter of the population lives in Copenhagen

@Denmark, People

Population: 
  5,187,821 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.23% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.45 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.28 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.81 years 
male: 
  72.93 years 
female: 
  78.86 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.68 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Dane(s) 
adjective: 
  Danish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Scandinavian, Eskimo, Faroese, German 
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 91%, other Protestant and Roman Catholic 2%,
  other 7% (1988)
Languages: 
  Danish, Faroese, Greenlandic (an Eskimo dialect), German (small
  minority)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  2,553,900 
by occupation: 
  private services 37.1%, government services 30.4%, manufacturing and
  mining 20%, construction 6.3%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing
  5.6%, electricity/gas/water 0.6% (1991)

@Denmark, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Denmark 
conventional short form: 
  Denmark 
local long form: 
  Kongeriget Danmark 
local short form: 
  Danmark 
Digraph: 
  DA
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Copenhagen 
Administrative divisions: 
  metropolitan Denmark - 14 counties (amter, singular - amt) and 1 city*
  (stad); Arhus, Bornholm, Frederiksborg, Fyn, Kbenhavn, Nordjylland,
  Ribe, Ringkbing, Roskilde, Snderjylland, Staden Kbenhavn*, Storstrm,
  Vejle, Vestsjaelland, Viborg
note: 
  see separate entries for the Faroe Islands and Greenland, which are
  part of the Danish realm and self-governing administrative divisions
Independence: 
  1849 (became a constitutional monarchy)
National holiday: 
  Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940) 
Constitution: 
  5 June 1953
Legal system: 
  civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen MARGRETHE II (since NA January 1972); Heir Apparent Crown Prince
  FREDERIK, elder son of the Queen (born 26 May 1968) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN (since NA January 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the monarch
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Folketing): 
  elections last held 12 December 1990 (next to be held by December
  1994); results - Social Democratic Party 37.4%, Conservative Party
  16.0%, Liberal 15.8%, Socialist People's Party 8.3%, Progress Party
  6.4%, Center Democratic Party 5.1%, Radical Liberal Party 3.5%,
  Christian People's Party 2.3%, other 5.2%; seats - (179 total;
  includes 2 from Greenland and 2 from the Faroe Islands) Social
  Democratic 69, Conservative 30, Liberal 29, Socialist People's 15,
  Progress Party 12, Center Democratic 9, Radical Liberal 7, Christian
  People's 4
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Social Democratic Party, Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN; Conservative Party,
  Torben RECHENDORFF; Liberal Party, Uffe ELLEMANN-JENSEN; Socialist
  People's Party, Holger K. NIELSEN; Progress Party, Johannes SORENSEN;
  Center Democratic Party, Mimi Stilling JAKOBSEN; Radical Liberal
  Party, Marianne JELVED; Christian People's Party, Jann SJURSEN; Common
  Course, Preben Moller HANSEN; Danish Workers' Party
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN,
  COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECE, EIB, ESA, FAO, G-9, GATT, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NC,
  NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIKOM, UNOMIG, UNMOGIP, UNPROFOR, UNTSO, UPU, WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Peter Pedersen DYVIG 
chancery: 
  3200 Whitehaven Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-4300 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-1470 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward E. ELSON 
embassy: 
  Dag Hammarskjolds Alle 24, 2100 Copenhagen O 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09716 
telephone: 
  [45] (31) 42-31-44 
FAX: 
  [45] (35) 43-0223 
Flag: 
  red with a white cross that extends to the edges of the flag; the
  vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side, and that
  design element of the DANNEBROG (Danish flag) was subsequently adopted
  by the other Nordic countries of Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden

@Denmark, Economy

Overview: 
  This modern economy features high-tech agriculture, up-to-date
  small-scale and corporate industry, extensive government welfare
  measures, comfortable living standards, and high dependence on foreign
  trade. Denmark's new center-left coalition government will concentrate
  on reducing the persistent high unemployment rate and the budget
  deficit as well as following the previous government's policies of
  maintaining low inflation and a current account surplus. In the face
  of recent international market pressure on the Danish krone, the
  coalition has also vowed to maintain a stable currency. The coalition
  hopes to lower marginal income taxes while maintaining overall tax
  revenues; boost industrial competitiveness through labor market and
  tax reforms and increased research and development funds; and improve
  welfare services for the neediest while cutting paperwork and delays.
  Prime Minister RASMUSSEN's reforms will focus on adapting Denmark to
  the criteria for European integration by 1999; although Copenhagen has
  won from the European Union (EU) the right to opt out of the European
  Monetary Union (EMU) if a national referendum rejects it. Denmark is,
  in fact, one of the few EU countries likely to fit into the EMU on
  time. Denmark is weathering the current worldwide slump better than
  many West European countries. As the EU's single market (formally
  established on 1 January 1993) gets underway, Danish economic growth
  is expected to pickup to around 2% in 1994. Danish approval of the
  Maastricht treaty on EU political and economic union in May 1993 has
  reversed the drop in investment, further boosting growth. The current
  account surplus remains strong as limitations on wage increases and
  low inflation - expected to be around 2% in 1994 - improve export
  competitiveness. Although unemployment is high, it remains stable
  compared to most European countries.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $95.6 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.5% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $18,500 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.8% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  11.8% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $48 billion 
expenditures: 
  $55.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993)
Exports: 
  $36.7 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  meat and meat products, dairy products, transport equipment
  (shipbuilding), fish, chemicals, industrial machinery
partners: 
  EC 54.3% (Germany 23.6%, UK 10.1%, France 5.7%), Sweden 10.5%, Norway
  5.8%, US 4.9%, Japan 3.6% (1992)
Imports: 
  $29.7 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum, machinery and equipment, chemicals, grain and foodstuffs,
  textiles, paper
partners: 
  EC 53.4% (Germany 23.1%, UK 8.2%, France 5.6%), Sweden 10.8%, Norway
  5.4%, US 5.7%, Japan 4.1% (1992)
External debt: 
  $40 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2.5% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  11,215,000 kW
production: 
  34.17 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,610 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, machinery and equipment, textiles and clothing,
  chemical products, electronics, construction, furniture, and other
  wood products, shipbuilding
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4% of GDP and employs 5.6% of labor force (includes
  fishing and forestry); farm products account for nearly 15% of export
  revenues; principal products - meat, dairy, grain, potatoes, rape,
  sugar beets, fish; self-sufficient in food production
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $5.9 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere
Exchange rates: 
  Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1 - 6.771 (January 1994), 6.484 (1993),
  6.036 (1992), 6.396 (1991), 6.189 (1990), 7.310 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Denmark, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,770 km; Danish State Railways (DSB) operate 2,120 km (1,999 km rail
  line and 121 km rail ferry services); 188 km electrified, 730 km
  double tracked; 650 km of standard-gauge lines are privately owned and
  operated
Highways: 
total: 
  66,482 km 
paved: 
  concrete, asphalt, stone block 64,551 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, improved earth 1,931 km 
Inland waterways: 
  417 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 110 km; petroleum products 578 km; natural gas 700 km 
Ports: 
  Alborg, Arhus, Copenhagen, Esbjerg, Fredericia; numerous secondary and
  minor ports
Merchant marine: 
  347 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,974,494 GRT/6,820,067 DWT,
  bulk 15, cargo 110, chemical tanker 24, combination bulk 1, container
  51, liquefied gas 36, livestock carrier 4, oil tanker 33, railcar
  carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 21, roll-on/roll-off cargo 39, short-sea
  passenger 12 
note: 
  Denmark has created its own internal register, called the Danish
  International Ship register (DIS); DIS ships do not have to meet
  Danish manning regulations, and they amount to a flag of convenience
  within the Danish register; by the end of 1990, 308 of the Danish-flag
  ships belonged to the DIS
Airports: 
total: 
  118 
usable: 
  109 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  28 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  9 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  7 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent telephone, telegraph, and broadcast services; 4,509,000
  telephones; buried and submarine cables and microwave radio relay
  support trunk network; broadcast stations - 3 AM, 2 FM, 50 TV; 19
  submarine coaxial cables; 7 earth stations operating in INTELSAT,
  EUTELSAT, and INMARSAT

@Denmark, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Danish Army, Royal Danish Navy, Royal Danish Air Force, Home
  Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,360,050; fit for military service 1,168,940; reach
  military age (20) annually 36,800 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.6 billion, 2% of GDP (1993)


@Djibouti, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, at the entrance to the Red Sea between Eritrea and
  Somalia
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  22,000 sq km 
land area: 
  21,980 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Massachusetts
Land boundaries: 
  total 508 km, Eritrea 113 km, Ethiopia 337 km, Somalia 58 km 
Coastline: 
  314 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  desert; torrid, dry
Terrain: 
  coastal plain and plateau separated by central mountains
Natural resources: 
  geothermal areas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  9% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  91% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  prone to earthquakes, droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ship Pollution; signed,
  but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  strategic location near world's busiest shipping lanes and close to
  Arabian oilfields; terminus of rail traffic into Ethiopia; a vast
  wasteland

@Djibouti, People

Population: 
  412,599 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.71% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  42.94 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  15.8 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  111 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  49.23 years 
male: 
  47.42 years 
female: 
  51.1 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.21 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Djiboutian(s) 
adjective: 
  Djiboutian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Somali 60%, Afar 35%, French, Arab, Ethiopian, and Italian 5% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 94%, Christian 6% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Arabic (official), Somali, Afar 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  48% 
male: 
  63% 
female: 
  34% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  a small number of semiskilled laborers at the port and 3,000 railway
  workers
note: 
  52% of population of working age (1983)

@Djibouti, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Djibouti 
conventional short form: 
  Djibouti 
former: 
  French Territory of the Afars and Issas  French Somaliland 
Digraph: 
  DJ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Djibouti 
Administrative divisions: 
  5 districts (cercles, singular - cercle); 'Ali Sabih, Dikhil,
  Djibouti, Obock, Tadjoura
Independence: 
  27 June 1977 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 June (1977) 
Constitution: 
  multiparty constitution approved in referendum 4 September 1992
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system, traditional practices, and Islamic
  law
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President HASSAN GOULED Aptidon (since 24 June 1977); election last
  held 7 May 1993 (next to be held NA 1999); results - President Hassan
  GOULED Aptidon was reelected
head of government: 
  Prime Minister BARKAT Gourad Hamadou (since 30 September 1978) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; responsible to the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Chamber of Deputies (Chambre des Deputes): 
  elections last held 18 December 1992; results - RPP is the only party;
  seats - (65 total) RPP 65
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
ruling party: 
  People's Progress Assembly (RPP), Hassan GOULED Aptidon
other parties: 
  Democratic Renewal Party (PRD), Mohamed Jama ELABE; Democratic
  National Party (PND), ADEN Robleh Awaleh
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD) and
  affiliates; Movement for Unity and Democracy (MUD)
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user),
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNESCO, UNCTAD, UNIDO,
  UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Roble OLHAYE 
chancery: 
  Suite 515, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 331-0270 
FAX: 
  (202) 331-0302 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Martin CHESES 
embassy: 
  Plateau du Serpent, Boulevard Marechal Joffre, Djibouti 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 185, Djibouti 
telephone: 
  [253] 35-39-95 
FAX: 
  [253] 35-39-40 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of light blue (top) and light green with a
  white isosceles triangle based on the hoist side bearing a red
  five-pointed star in the center

@Djibouti, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on service activities connected with the
  country's strategic location and status as a free trade zone in
  northeast Africa. Djibouti provides services as both a transit port
  for the region and an international transshipment and refueling
  center. It has few natural resources and little industry. The nation
  is, therefore, heavily dependent on foreign assistance (an important
  supplement to GDP) to help support its balance of payments and to
  finance development projects. An unemployment rate of over 30%
  continues to be a major problem. Per capita consumption dropped an
  estimated 35% over the last five years because of recession, civil
  war, and a high population growth rate (including immigrants and
  refugees).
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $500 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  over 30% (1989)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $170 million 
expenditures: 
  $203 million, including capital expenditures of $70 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $158 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  hides and skins, coffee (in transit)
partners: 
  Africa 47%, Middle East 40%, Western Europe 12%
Imports: 
  $334 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  foods, beverages, transport equipment, chemicals, petroleum products
partners: 
  Western Europe 48%, Asia 25%, Africa 8%
External debt: 
  $355 million (December 1990)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3% (1991 est.); manufacturing accounts for 12% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  115,000 kW
production: 
  200 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  580 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  limited to a few small-scale enterprises, such as dairy products and
  mineral-water bottling
Agriculture: 
  accounts for only 2% of GDP; scanty rainfall limits crop production to
  mostly fruit and vegetables; half of population pastoral nomads
  herding goats, sheep, and camels; imports bulk of food needs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY78-89), $39 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, including ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $1.1 billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $149 million;
  Communist countries (1970-89), $35 million 
Currency: 
  1 Djiboutian franc (DF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Djiboutian francs (DF) per US$1 - 177.721 (fixed rate since 1973)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Djibouti, Communications

Railroads: 
  the Ethiopian-Djibouti railroad extends for 97 km through Djibouti
Highways: 
total: 
  2,900 km 
paved: 
  280 km 
unpaved: 
  improved, unimproved earth 2,620 km (1982)
Ports: 
  Djibouti
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,369 GRT/3,030 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  13 
usable: 
  11 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone facilities in the city of Djibouti are adequate as are the
  microwave radio relay connections to outlying areas of the country;
  international connections via submarine cable to Saudi Arabia and by
  satellite to other countries; one ground station each for Indian Ocean
  INTELSAT and ARABSAT; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 2 FM, 1 TV

@Djibouti, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Djibouti National Army (including Navy and Air Force), National
  Security Force (Force Nationale de Securite), National Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 99,811; fit for military service 58,346 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $26 million, NA% of GDP (1989)


@Dominica, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about halfway between Puerto
  Rico and Trinidad and Tobago
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  750 sq km 
land area: 
  750 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than four times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  148 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds; heavy rainfall
Terrain: 
  rugged mountains of volcanic origin
Natural resources: 
  timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  9% 
permanent crops: 
  13% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  41% 
other: 
  34% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  flash floods are a constant threat; occasional hurricanes
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea,
  Ozone Layer Protection

@Dominica, People

Population: 
  87,696 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.32% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  20.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.98 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  10.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.96 years 
male: 
  74.12 years 
female: 
  79.95 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.99 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Dominican(s) 
adjective: 
  Dominican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black, Carib Indians 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 77%, Protestant 15% (Methodist 5%, Pentecostal 3%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist 3%, Baptist 2%, other 2%), none 2%, unknown 1%,
  other 5% 
Languages: 
  English (official), French patois 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  94% 
male: 
  94% 
female: 
  94% 
Labor force: 
  25,000 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 40%, industry and commerce 32%, services 28% (1984)

@Dominica, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Commonwealth of Dominica 
conventional short form: 
  Dominica 
Digraph: 
  DO
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Roseau 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 parishes; Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint John,
  Saint Joseph, Saint Luke, Saint Mark, Saint Patrick, Saint Paul, Saint
  Peter
Independence: 
  3 November 1978 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 3 November (1978) 
Constitution: 
  3 November 1978
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Crispin Anselm SORHAINDO (since 25 October 1993) election
  last held 4 October 1993 (next to be held NA October 1998); results -
  President Crispin Anselm SORHAINDO was elected by the House of
  Assembly to a five year term
head of government: 
  Prime Minister (Mary) Eugenia CHARLES (since 21 July 1980, elected for
  a third term 28 May 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president on the advice of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 28 May 1990 (next to be held May 1995); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (30 total; 9 appointed senators
  and 21 elected representatives) DFP 11, UWP 6, DLP 4
Judicial branch: 
  Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Dominica Freedom Party (DFP), Brian ALLEYNE; Dominica Labor Party
  (DLP), Rosie DOUGLAS; United Workers Party (UWP), Edison JAMES
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Dominica Liberation Movement (DLM), a small leftist group
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTERPOL, LORCS, NAM (observer), OAS, OECS,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Dominica has no chancery in the US
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no official presence since the Ambassador resides in Bridgetown
  (Barbados), but travels frequently to Dominica
Flag: 
  green with a centered cross of three equal bands - the vertical part
  is yellow (hoist side), black, and white - the horizontal part is
  yellow (top), black, and white; superimposed in the center of the
  cross is a red disk bearing a sisserou parrot encircled by 10 green
  five-pointed stars edged in yellow; the 10 stars represent the 10
  administrative divisions (parishes)

@Dominica, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is dependent on agriculture and thus is highly vulnerable
  to climatic conditions. Agriculture accounts for about 30% of GDP and
  employs 40% of the labor force. Principal products include bananas,
  citrus, mangoes, root crops, and coconuts. Development of the tourist
  industry remains difficult because of the rugged coastline and the
  lack of an international airport.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $185 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.6% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,100 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5.2% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $70 million 
expenditures: 
  $84 million, including capital expenditures of $26 million (FY91 est.)
Exports: 
  $54.6 million (1992)
commodities: 
  bananas, soap, bay oil, vegetables, grapefruit, oranges
partners: 
  UK 50%, CARICOM countries, Italy, US
Imports: 
  $97.5 million (1992)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, machinery and equipment, food, chemicals
partners: 
  US 25%, CARICOM, UK, Canada
External debt: 
  $92.8 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.2% (1992); accounts for 7% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  7,000 kW
production: 
  16 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  185 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  soap, coconut oil, tourism, copra, furniture, cement blocks, shoes
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 30% of GDP; principal crops - bananas, citrus, mangoes,
  root crops, coconuts; bananas provide the bulk of export earnings;
  forestry and fisheries potential not exploited
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $120 million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Dominica, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  750 km 
paved: 
  370 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel or earth 380 km 
Ports: 
  Roseau, Portsmouth
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  4,600 telephones in fully automatic network; VHF and UHF link to Saint
  Lucia; new SHF links to Martinique and Guadeloupe; broadcast stations
  - 3 AM, 2 FM, 1 cable TV

@Dominica, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Commonwealth of Dominica Police Force 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Dominican Republic, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the northern Caribbean Sea, about halfway between Cuba
  and Puerto Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  48,730 sq km 
land area: 
  48,380 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of New Hampshire
Land boundaries: 
  total 275 km, Haiti 275 km 
Coastline: 
  1,288 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the outer edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  6 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical maritime; little seasonal temperature variation; seasonal
  variation in rainfall
Terrain: 
  rugged highlands and mountains with fertile valleys interspersed
Natural resources: 
  nickel, bauxite, gold, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  23% 
permanent crops: 
  7% 
meadows and pastures: 
  43% 
forest and woodland: 
  13% 
other: 
  14% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,250 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water shortages; soil eroding into the sea damages coral reefs;
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to occasional hurricanes (July to October)
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but
  not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  shares island of Hispaniola with Haiti (eastern two-thirds is the
  Dominican Republic, western one-third is Haiti)

@Dominican Republic, People

Population: 
  7,826,075 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.8% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.87 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.2 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  51.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.35 years 
male: 
  66.22 years 
female: 
  70.6 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.8 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Dominican(s) 
adjective: 
  Dominican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  white 16%, black 11%, mixed 73% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95% 
Languages: 
  Spanish
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  83% 
male: 
  85% 
female: 
  82% 
Labor force: 
  2.3 million to 2.6 million
by occupation: 
  agriculture 49%, services 33%, industry 18% (1986)

@Dominican Republic, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Dominican Republic 
conventional short form: 
  none 
local long form: 
  Republica Dominicana 
local short form: 
  none 
Digraph: 
  DR
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Santo Domingo 
Administrative divisions: 
  29 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia) and 1 district*
  (distrito); Azua, Baoruco, Barahona, Dajabon, Distrito Nacional*,
  Duarte, Elias Pina, El Seibo, Espaillat, Hato Mayor, Independencia, La
  Altagracia, La Romana, La Vega, Maria Trinidad Sanchez, Monsenor
  Nouel, Monte Cristi, Monte Plata, Pedernales, Peravia, Puerto Plata,
  Salcedo, Samana, Sanchez Ramirez, San Cristobal, San Juan, San Pedro
  De Macoris, Santiago, Santiago Rodriguez, Valverde
Independence: 
  27 February 1844 (from Haiti)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 February (1844) 
Constitution: 
  28 November 1966
Legal system: 
  based on French civil codes
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory or married persons
  regardless of age
note: 
  members of the armed forces and police cannot vote
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Joaquin BALAGUER Ricardo (since 16 August 1986, fifth
  elected term began 16 August 1990); Vice President Carlos A. MORALES
  Troncoso (since 16 August 1986); election last held 16 May 1990 (next
  to be held May 1994); results - Joaquin BALAGUER (PRSC) 35.7%, Juan
  BOSCH Gavino (PLD) 34.4%, Jose Francisco PENA Gomez (PRD) 22.9%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; nominated by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Congress (Congreso Nacional)
Senate (Senado): 
  elections last held 16 May 1990 (next to be held May 1994); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (30 total) PRSC 16, PLD 12, PRD 2
Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados): 
  elections last held 16 May 1990 (next to be held May 1994); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (120 total) PLD 44, PRSC 41, PRD
  33, PRI 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
Major parties: 
  Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC), Joaquin BALAGUER Ricardo;
  Dominican Liberation Party (PLD), Juan BOSCH Gavino; Dominican
  Revolutionary Party (PRD), Jose Franciso PENA Gomez; Independent
  Revolutionary Party (PRI), Jacobo MAJLUTA
Minor parties: 
  National Veterans and Civilian Party (PNVC), Juan Rene BEAUCHAMPS
  Javier; Liberal Party of the Dominican Republic (PLRD), Andres Van Der
  HORST; Democratic Quisqueyan Party (PQD), Elias WESSIN Chavez;
  National Progressive Force (FNP), Marino VINICIO Castillo; Popular
  Christian Party (PPC), Rogelio DELGADO Bogaert; Dominican Communist
  Party (PCD), Narciso ISA Conde; Dominican Workers' Party (PTD), Ivan
  RODRIGUEZ; Anti-Imperialist Patriotic Union (UPA), Ignacio RODRIGUEZ
  Chiappini; Alliance for Democracy Party (APD), Maximilano Rabelais
  PUIG Miller, Nelsida MARMOLEJOS, Vicente BENGOA
note: 
  in 1983 several leftist parties, including the PCD, joined to form the
  Dominican Leftist Front (FID); however, they still retain individual
  party structures
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Collective of Popular Organzations (COP), leader NA
Member of: 
  ACP, CARICOM (observer), ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), LORCS, NAM (guest), OAS, OPANAL,
  PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jose del Carmen ARIZA Gomez 
chancery: 
  1715 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-6280 
FAX: 
  (202) 265-8057 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, Mayaguez (Puerto Rico), Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto
  Rico) 
consulate(s): 
  Charlotte Amalie (Virgin Islands), Detroit, Houston, Jacksonville,
  Minneapolis, Mobile, Ponce (Puerto Rico), and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Robert S. PASTORINO 
embassy: 
  corner of Calle Cesar Nicolas Penson and Calle Leopoldo Navarro, Santo
  Domingo 
mailing address: 
  Unit 5500, Santo Domingo; APO AA 34041-0008 
telephone: 
  (809) 541-2171 and 541-8100 
FAX: 
  (809) 686-7437 
Flag: 
  a centered white cross that extends to the edges, divides the flag
  into four rectangles - the top ones are blue (hoist side) and red, the
  bottom ones are red (hoist side) and blue; a small coat of arms is at
  the center of the cross

@Dominican Republic, Economy

Overview: 
  Rapid growth of free trade zones has led to a substantial expansion of
  manufacturing for export, especially of wearing apparel. Over the past
  decade, tourism has also increased in importance and is a major earner
  of foreign exchange and a source of new jobs. Agriculture remains a
  key sector of the economy. The principal commercial crop is sugarcane,
  followed by coffee, cotton, cocoa, and tobacco. Domestic industry is
  based on the processing of agricultural products, oil refining,
  minerals, and chemicals. Unemployment is officially reported at about
  30%, but there is considerable underemployment. Growth fell to a
  moderate 3% in 1993 because of power shortages in industry and
  political uncertainty which slowed down foreign investment.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $23 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  8% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  30% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $769 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  ferronickel, sugar, gold, coffee, cocoa
partners: 
  US 56%, EC 22%, Puerto Rico 8% (1991)
Imports: 
  $2.2 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, petroleum, cotton and fabrics, chemicals and
  pharmaceuticals
partners: 
  US 50%
External debt: 
  $4.7 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -0.1% (1991); accounts for 14% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,283,000 kW
production: 
  5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  660 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, sugar processing, ferronickel and gold mining, textiles,
  cement, tobacco
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 18% of GDP and employs 49% of labor force; sugarcane is
  the most important commercial crop, followed by coffee, cotton, cocoa,
  and tobacco; food crops - rice, beans, potatoes, corn, bananas; animal
  output - cattle, hogs, dairy products, meat, eggs; not self-sufficient
  in food
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for South American drugs destined for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY85-89), $575 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $655
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Dominican peso (RD$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Dominican pesos (RD$) per US$1 - 12.841 (January 1994), 12.679 (1993),
  12.774 (1992), 12.692 (1991), 8.525 (1990), 6.340 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Dominican Republic, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,655 km total in numerous segments; 4 different gauges from 0.558 m
  to 1.435 m
Highways: 
total: 
  12,000 km 
paved: 
  5,800 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel or improved earth 5,600 km; unimproved earth 600 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 96 km; petroleum products 8 km 
Ports: 
  Santo Domingo, Haina, San Pedro de Macoris, Puerto Plata
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,587 GRT/1,165 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  36 
usable: 
  31 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  8 
Telecommunications: 
  relatively efficient domestic system based on islandwide microwave
  relay network; 190,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 120 AM, no FM,
  18 TV, 6 shortwave; 1 coaxial submarine cable; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Dominican Republic, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,114,606; fit for military service 1,333,049; reach
  military age (18) annually 81,919 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $110 million, 0.7% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Ecuador, Geography

Location: 
  Western South America, bordering the Pacific Ocean at the Equator
  between Colombia and Peru
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  283,560 sq km 
land area: 
  276,840 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Nevada
note: 
  includes Galapagos Islands
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,010 km, Colombia 590 km, Peru 1,420 km 
Coastline: 
  2,237 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  claims continental shelf between mainland and Galapagos Islands
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  three sections of the boundary with Peru are in dispute
Climate: 
  tropical along coast becoming cooler inland
Terrain: 
  coastal plain (costa), inter-Andean central highlands (sierra), and
  flat to rolling eastern jungle (oriente)
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, fish, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  17% 
forest and woodland: 
  51% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  5,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; water pollution
natural hazards: 
  subject to frequent earthquakes, landslides, volcanic activity;
  periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber, Wetlands
Note: 
  Cotopaxi in Andes is highest active volcano in world

@Ecuador, People

Population: 
  10,677,067 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.01% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.82 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.67 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  39.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.98 years 
male: 
  67.46 years 
female: 
  72.62 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.08 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ecuadorian(s) 
adjective: 
  Ecuadorian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo (mixed Indian and Spanish) 55%, Indian 25%, Spanish 10%, black
  10% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), Indian languages (especially Quechua)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  88% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  86% 
Labor force: 
  2.8 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 35%, manufacturing 21%, commerce 16%, services and other
  activities 28% (1982)

@Ecuador, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Ecuador 
conventional short form: 
  Ecuador 
local long form: 
  Republica del Ecuador 
local short form: 
  Ecuador 
Digraph: 
  EC
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Quito 
Administrative divisions: 
  21 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Azuay, Bolivar,
  Canar, Carchi, Chimborazo, Cotopaxi, El Oro, Esmeraldas, Galapagos,
  Guayas, Imbabura, Loja, Los Rios, Manabi, Morona-Santiago, Napo,
  Pastaza, Pichincha, Sucumbios, Tungurahua, Zamora-Chinchipe
Independence: 
  24 May 1822 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 10 August (1809) (independence of Quito)
Constitution: 
  10 August 1979
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal, compulsory for literate persons ages
  18-65, optional for other eligible voters
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Sixto DURAN BALLEN Cordovez (since 10 August 1992); Vice
  President Alberto DAHIK Garzoni (since 10 August 1992); election
  runoff election held 5 July 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results -
  Sixto DURAN BALLEN elected as president and Alberto DAHIK elected as
  vice president
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Congress (Congreso Nacional): 
  elections last held 17 May 1992 (next to be held 1 May 1994); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (77 total) PSC 20, PRE 15, PUR
  12, ID 7, PC 6, DP 5, PSE 3, MPD 3, PLRE 2, CFP 2, FRA 1, APRE 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
Center-Right parties: 
  Social Christian Party (PSC), Jaime NEBOT Saadi, president; Republican
  Unity Party (PUR), President Sixto DURAN BALLEN, leader; Conservative
  Party (PC), Vice President Alberto DAHIK, president
Center-Left parties: 
  Democratic Left (ID), Andres VALLEJO Arcos, Rodrigo BORJA Cevallos,
  leaders; Popular Democracy (DP), Jamil MANUAD Witt, president;
  Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party (PLRE), Carlos Luis PLAZA Aray,
  director; Radical Alfarista Front (FRA), Jaime ASPIAZU Seminario,
  director
Populist parties: 
  Roldista Party (PRE), Abdala BUCARAM Ortiz, director; Concentration of
  Popular Forces (CFP), Rafael SANTELICES, director; Popular
  Revolutionary Action (APRE), Frank VARGAS Passos, leader; Assad
  Bucaram Party (PAB), Avicena BUCARAM, leader; People, Change, and
  Democracy (PCD), Raul AULESTIA, director
Far-Left parties: 
  Popular Democratic Movement (MPD), Jorge Fausto MORENO, director;
  Ecuadorian Socialist Party (PSE), Leon ROLDOS, leader; Broad Leftist
  Front (FADI), Jose Xavier GARAYCOA, president; Ecuadorian National
  Liberation (LN), Alfredo CASTILLO, director
Communists: 
  Communist Party of Ecuador (PCE, pro-North Korea), Rene Leon Mague
  MOSWUERRA, secretary general (5,000 members); Communist Party of
  Ecuador/Marxist-Leninist (PCMLE, Maoist), leader NA (3,000 members)
Member of: 
  AG, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES,
  LAIA, LORCS, NAM, OAS, ONUSAL, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edgar TERAN 
chancery: 
  2535 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-7200 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, San
  Diego, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Peter F. ROMERO 
embassy: 
  Avenida 12 de Octubre y Avenida Patria, Quito 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 538, Unit 5309, Quito, or APO AA 34039-3420 
telephone: 
  [593] (2) 562-890, 561-623 or 624 
FAX: 
  [593] (2) 502-052 
consulate(s) general: 
  Guayaquil 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of yellow (top, double width), blue, and red
  with the coat of arms superimposed at the center of the flag; similar
  to the flag of Colombia that is shorter and does not bear a coat of
  arms

@Ecuador, Economy

Overview: 
  Ecuador has substantial oil resources and rich agricultural areas.
  Growth has been uneven because of natural disasters, fluctuations in
  global oil prices, and government policies designed to curb inflation.
  Banana exports, second only to oil, have suffered as a result of
  import quotas of the European Union and banana blight. The new
  President Sixto DURAN-BALLEN, has a much more favorable attitude
  toward foreign investment than did his predecessor. Ecuador has
  implemented trade agreements with Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, and
  Venezuela and has applied for GATT membership. At the end of 1991,
  Ecuador received a standby IMF loan of $105 million, which will permit
  the country to proceed with the rescheduling of Paris Club debt. In
  September 1992, the government launched a new, macroeconomic program
  that gives more play to market forces. In 1993, the DURAN-BALLEN
  administration adopted a rigorous austerity program that resulted in
  economic stabilization, with inflation cut in half and international
  reserves boosted to a record $1.3 billion. Growth in 1993 was perhaps
  only 2% due to falling export prices, notably oil, and slow progress
  on privatization.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $41.8 billion 
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  31% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  8% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $3 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  petroleum 42%, bananas, shrimp, cocoa, coffee
partners: 
  US 53.4%, Latin America, Caribbean, EC countries
Imports: 
  $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  transport equipment, vehicles, machinery, chemicals
partners: 
  US 32.7%, Latin America, Caribbean, EC countries, Japan
External debt: 
  $12.7 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.9% (1991); accounts for almost 30% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,921,000 kW
production: 
  7.676 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  700 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, food processing, textiles, metal works, paper products,
  wood products, chemicals, plastics, fishing, timber
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 18% of GDP and 35% of labor force (including fishing and
  forestry); leading producer and exporter of bananas and balsawood;
  other exports - coffee, cocoa, fish, shrimp; crop production - rice,
  potatoes, manioc, plantains, sugarcane; livestock sector - cattle,
  sheep, hogs, beef, pork, dairy products; net importer of foodgrains,
  dairy products, and sugar
Illicit drugs: 
  significant transit country for derivatives of coca originating in
  Colombia, Bolivia, and Peru; minor illicit producer of coca; importer
  of precursor chemicals used in production of illicit narcotics;
  important money-laundering hub
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $498 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2.15
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $64 million 
Currency: 
  1 sucre (S/) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  sucres (S/) per US$1 - 1,947.1 (October 1993), 1,534.0 (1992),
  1,046.25 (1991), 767.8 (1990), 767.78 (1990), 526.35 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Ecuador, Communications

Railroads: 
  965 km total; all 1.067-meter-gauge single track
Highways: 
total: 
  28,000 km 
paved: 
  3,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel or improved earth 17,400 km; unimproved earth 7,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,500 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 800 km; petroleum products 1,358 km 
Ports: 
  Guayaquil, Manta, Puerto Bolivar, Esmeraldas
Merchant marine: 
  40 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 263,752 GRT/378,675 DWT, bulk 1,
  cargo 3, container 2, liquefied gas 1, oil tanker 14, passenger 3,
  refrigerated cargo 15, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  211 
usable: 
  208 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  56 
with runway over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  21 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic facilities generally adequate; 318,000 telephones; telephone
  density - 30 per 1,000 persons; broadcast stations - 272 AM, no FM, 33
  TV, 39 shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Ecuador, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (Ejercito Ecuatoriano), Navy (Armada Ecuatoriana), Air Force
  (Fuerza Aerea Ecuatoriana), National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,734,988; fit for military service 1,850,989; reach
  military age (20) annually 111,707 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Egypt, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea,
  between Sudan and Libya
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,001,450 sq km 
land area: 
  995,450 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than three times the size of New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,689 km, Gaza Strip 11 km, Israel 255 km, Libya 1,150 km, Sudan
  1,273 km 
Coastline: 
  2,450 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  administrative boundary with Sudan does not coincide with
  international boundary creating the "Hala'ib Triangle," a barren area
  of 20,580 sq km; the dispute over this area escalated in 1993, this
  area continues to be in dispute
Climate: 
  desert; hot, dry summers with moderate winters
Terrain: 
  vast desert plateau interrupted by Nile valley and delta
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, manganese, limestone,
  gypsum, talc, asbestos, lead, zinc 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  95% 
Irrigated land: 
  25,850 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  agricultural land being lost to urbanization and windblown sands;
  increasing soil salinization below Aswan High Dam; desertification;
  oil pollution threatening coral reefs, beaches, and marine habitats;
  other water pollution from agricultural pesticides, untreated sewage,
  and industrial effluents; water scarcity away from the Nile which is
  the only perennial water source; rapid growth in population
  overstraining natural resources
natural hazards: 
  periods of drought; subject to frequent earthquakes, landslides,
  volcanic activity; hot, driving windstorm called khamsin occurs in
  spring
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  controls Sinai Peninsula, only land bridge between Africa and
  remainder of Eastern Hemisphere; controls Suez Canal, shortest sea
  link between Indian Ocean and Mediterranean; size, and juxtaposition
  to Israel, establish its major role in Middle Eastern geopolitics

@Egypt, People

Population: 
  60,765,028 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.95% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.69 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.87 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  76.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  60.79 years 
male: 
  58.91 years 
female: 
  62.76 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.77 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Egyptian(s) 
adjective: 
  Egyptian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Eastern Hamitic stock (Egyptians, Bedouins, and Berbers) 99%, Greek,
  Nubian, Armenian, other European (primarily Italian and French) 1% 
Religions: 
  Muslim (mostly Sunni) 94% (official estimate), Coptic Christian and
  other 6% (official estimate)
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), English and French widely understood by educated
  classes  
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  48% 
male: 
  63% 
female: 
  34% 
Labor force: 
  15 million (1992 est.)
by occupation: 
  government, public sector enterprises, and armed forces 36%,
  agriculture 34%, privately owned service and manufacturing enterprises
  20% (1984)
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor; 2,500,000 Egyptians work abroad, mostly in
  Saudi Arabia and the Gulf Arab states (1993 est.)

@Egypt, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Arab Republic of Egypt 
conventional short form: 
  Egypt 
local long form: 
  Jumhuriyat Misr al-Arabiyah 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  United Arab Republic (with Syria) 
Digraph: 
  EG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Cairo 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Ad Daqahliyah, Al
  Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrah, Al Fayyum, Al Gharbiyah, Al Iskandariyah,
  Al Isma'iliyah, Al Jizah, Al Minufiyah, Al Minya, Al Qahirah, Al
  Qalyubiyah, Al Wadi al Jadid, Ash Sharqiyah, As Suways, Aswan, Asyu't,
  Bani Suwayf, Bur Sa'id, Dumyat, Janub Sina, Kafr ash Shaykh, Matruh,
  Qina, Shamal Sina, Suhaj
Independence: 
  28 February 1922 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Revolution, 23 July (1952) 
Constitution: 
  11 September 1971
Legal system: 
  based on English common law, Islamic law, and Napoleonic codes;
  judicial review by Supreme Court and Council of State (oversees
  validity of administrative decisions); accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Mohammed Hosni MUBARAK (was made acting President on 6
  October 1981 upon the assassination of President SADAT and sworn in as
  president on 14 October 1981); national referendum held 4 October 1993
  validated Mubarak's nomination by the People's Assembly to a third
  6-year presidential term
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Atef Mohammed Najib SEDKY (since 12 November 1986) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral
People's Assembly (Majlis al-Cha'b): 
  elections last held 29 November 1990 (next to be held NA November
  1995); results - NDP 86.3%, NPUG 1.3%, independents 12.4%; seats -
  (454 total, 444 elected, 10 appointed by the president) NDP 383, NPUG
  6, independents 55; note - most opposition parties boycotted; NDP
  figures include NDP members who ran as independents and other
  NDP-affiliated independents
Advisory Council (Majlis al-Shura): 
  functions only in a consultative role; elections last held 8 June 1989
  (next to be held NA June 1995); results - NDP 100%; seats - (258
  total, 172 elected, 86 appointed by the president) NDP 172
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Democratic Party (NDP), President Mohammed Hosni MUBARAK,
  leader, is the dominant party; legal opposition parties are; New Wafd
  Party (NWP), Fu'ad SIRAJ AL-DIN; Socialist Labor Party, Ibrahim
  SHUKRI; National Progressive Unionist Grouping (NPUG), Khalid
  MUHYI-AL-DIN; Socialist Liberal Party (SLP), Mustafa Kamal MURAD;
  Democratic Unionist Party, Mohammed 'Abd-al-Mun'im TURK; Umma Party,
  Ahmad al-SABAHI; Misr al-Fatah Party (Young Egypt Party), Ali al-Din
  SALIH; Nasserist Arab Democratic Party, Dia' al-din DAWUD; Democratic
  Peoples' Party, Anwar AFIFI; The Greens Party, Kamal KIRAH
note: 
  formation of political parties must be approved by government
Other political or pressure groups: 
  the constitution bans religious-based political parties; nonetheless,
  the government tolerates limited political activity by the technically
  illegal Muslim Brotherhood, which constitutes Mubarak's chief
  political opposition; trade unions and professional associations are
  officially sanctioned
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACC, ACCT (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AG (observer), AL, AMF,
  CAEU, CCC, EBRD, ECA, ESCWA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, GATT, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAPEC,
  OAS (observer), OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNOMOZ, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, UNRWA, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ahmed Maher El SAYED 
chancery: 
  2310 Decatur Place NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 232-5400 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward WALKER 
embassy: 
  (North Gate) 8, Kamel El-Din Saleh Street, Garden City, Cairo 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09839-4900 
telephone: 
  [20] (2) 355-7371 
FAX: 
  [20] (2) 357-3200 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black with the
  national emblem (a shield superimposed on a golden eagle facing the
  hoist side above a scroll bearing the name of the country in Arabic)
  centered in the white band; similar to the flag of Yemen, which has a
  plain white band; also similar to the flag of Syria that has two green
  stars and to the flag of Iraq, which has three green stars (plus an
  Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line centered in the white band

@Egypt, Economy

Overview: 
  Egypt has one of the largest public sectors of all the Third World
  economies, most industrial plants being owned by the government.
  Overregulation holds back technical modernization and foreign
  investment. Even so, the economy grew rapidly during the late 1970s
  and early 1980s, but in 1986 the collapse of world oil prices and an
  increasingly heavy burden of debt servicing led Egypt to begin
  negotiations with the IMF for balance-of-payments support. Egypt's
  first IMF standby arrangement concluded in mid-1987 was suspended in
  early 1988 because of the government's failure to adopt promised
  reforms. Egypt signed a follow-on program with the IMF and also
  negotiated a structural adjustment loan with the World Bank in 1991.
  In 1991-93 the government made solid progress on administrative
  reforms such as liberalizing exchange and interest rates but resisted
  implementing major structural reforms like streamlining the public
  sector. As a result, the economy has not gained momentum and
  unemployment has become a growing problem. Egypt probably will
  continue making uneven progress in implementing the successor programs
  with the IMF and World Bank it signed onto in late 1993. In 1992-93
  tourism plunged 20% or so because of sporadic attacks by Islamic
  extremists on tourist groups. President MUBARAK has cited population
  growth as the main cause of the country's economic troubles. The
  addition of about 1.4 million people a year to the already huge
  population of 60 million exerts enormous pressure on the 5% of the
  land area available for agriculture.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $139 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,400 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  20% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $16.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $19.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.4 billion (FY94
  est.)
Exports: 
  $3.5 billion (f.o.b., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil and petroleum products, cotton yarn, raw cotton, textiles,
  metal products, chemicals
partners: 
  EC, Eastern Europe, US, Japan
Imports: 
  $10.5 billion (c.i.f., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, foods, fertilizers, wood products, durable
  consumer goods, capital goods
partners: 
  EC, US, Japan, Eastern Europe
External debt: 
  $32 billion (March 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -0.4% (FY92 est.); accounts for 18% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  14,175,000 kW
production: 
  47 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  830 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, food processing, tourism, chemicals, petroleum,
  construction, cement, metals
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 20% of GDP and employs more than one-third of labor
  force; dependent on irrigation water from the Nile; world's
  sixth-largest cotton exporter; other crops produced include rice,
  corn, wheat, beans, fruit, vegetables; not self-sufficient in food for
  a rapidly expanding population; livestock - cattle, water buffalo,
  sheep, goats; annual fish catch about 140,000 metric tons
Illicit drugs: 
  a transit point for Southwest Asian and Southeast Asian heroin and
  opium moving to Europe and the US; popular transit stop for Nigerian
  couriers; large domestic consumption of hashish from Lebanon and Syria
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $15.7 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-88), $10.1
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $2.9 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89),  $2.4 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Egyptian pound (#E) = 100 piasters
Exchange rates: 
  Egyptian pounds (#E) per US$1 - 3.369 (November 1993), 3.345 (November
  1992), 2.7072 (1990), 2.5171 (1989), 2.2233 (1988), 1.5183 (1987)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Egypt, Communications

Railroads: 
  5,110 km total; 4,763 km 1,435-meter standard gauge, 347 km
  0.750-meter gauge; 951 km double track; 25 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  45,500 km 
paved: 
  18,300 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 12,503 km; earth 14,697 km 
Inland waterways: 
  3,500 km (including the Nile, Lake Nasser, Alexandria-Cairo Waterway,
  and numerous smaller canals in the delta); Suez Canal, 193.5 km long
  (including approaches), used by oceangoing vessels drawing up to 16.1
  meters of water
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,171 km; petroleum products 596 km; natural gas 460 km 
Ports: 
  Alexandria, Port Said, Suez, Bur Safajah, Damietta
Merchant marine: 
  171 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,08,208 GRT/1,617,890 DWT,
  bulk 16, cargo 88, container 1, oil tanker 14, passenger 27,
  refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 15, short-sea passenger 7
Airports: 
total: 
  92 
usable: 
  82 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  66 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  45 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  23 
Telecommunications: 
  large system by Third World standards but inadequate for present
  requirements and undergoing extensive upgrading; 600,000 telephones
  (est.) - 11 telephones per 1,000 persons; principal centers at
  Alexandria, Cairo, Al Mansurah, Ismailia Suez, and Tanta are connected
  by coaxial cable and microwave radio relay; international traffic is
  carried by satellite - one earth station for each of Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT, Indian Ocean INTELSAT, ARABSAT and INMARSAT; by 5 coaxial
  submarine cables, microwave troposcatter (to Sudan), and microwave
  radio relay (to Libya, Israel, and Jordan); broadcast stations - 39
  AM, 6 FM, and 41 TV

@Egypt, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Command 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 15,335,889; fit for military service 9,961,128; reach
  military age (20) annually 625,748 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.05 billion, 6% of GDP (FY92/93)


@El Salvador, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, bordering the North Pacific Ocean between Guatemala
  and Honduras
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  21,040 sq km 
land area: 
  20,720 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Massachusetts
Land boundaries: 
  total 545 km, Guatemala 203 km, Honduras 342 km 
Coastline: 
  307 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm; overflight and navigation permitted beyond 12 nm
International disputes: 
  land boundary dispute with Honduras mostly resolved by 11 September
  1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision; ICJ referred the
  maritime boundary in the Golfo de Fonseca to an earlier agreement in
  this century and advised that some tripartite resolution among El
  Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua likely would be required
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy season (May to October); dry season (November to
  April)
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with narrow coastal belt and central plateau
Natural resources: 
  hydropower, geothermal power, petroleum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  27% 
permanent crops: 
  8% 
meadows and pastures: 
  29% 
forest and woodland: 
  6% 
other: 
  30% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,200 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution; contamination of soils
  from disposal of toxic wastes
natural hazards: 
  known as the Land of Volcanoes, subject to frequent and sometimes very
  destructive earthquakes and volcanic activity
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  smallest Central American country and only one without a coastline on
  Caribbean Sea

@El Salvador, People

Population: 
  5,752,511 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.04% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.81 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.36 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  40.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  66.99 years 
male: 
  64.41 years 
female: 
  69.71 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.78 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Salvadoran(s) 
adjective: 
  Salvadoran 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo 94%, Indian 5%, white 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 75% 
note: 
  Roman Catholic about 75%; there is extensive activity by Protestant
  groups throughout the country; by the end of 1992, there were an
  estimated 1 million Protestant evangelicals in El Salvador
Languages: 
  Spanish, Nahua (among some Indians)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  73% 
male: 
  76% 
female: 
  70% 
Labor force: 
  1.7 million (1982 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 40%, commerce 16%, manufacturing 15%, government 13%,
  financial services 9%, transportation 6%, other 1%
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor and a large pool of unskilled labor, but
  manpower training programs improving situation (1984 est.)

@El Salvador, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of El Salvador 
conventional short form: 
  El Salvador 
local long form: 
  Republica de El Salvador 
local short form: 
  El Salvador 
Digraph: 
  ES
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  San Salvador 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Ahuachapan,
  Cabanas, Chalatenango, Cuscatlan, La Libertad, La Paz, La Union,
  Morazan, San Miguel, San Salvador, Santa Ana, San Vicente, Sonsonate,
  Usulutan
Independence: 
  15 September 1821 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 15 September (1821) 
Constitution: 
  20 December 1983
Legal system: 
  based on civil and Roman law, with traces of common law; judicial
  review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court; accepts compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Armando CALDERON SOL (since 1 June 1994); Vice President
  Enrique BORGO Bustamante (since 1 June 1994) election last held 20
  March 1994 (next to be held March 1999); results - Armando CALDERON
  SOL (ARENA) 49.03%, Ruben ZAMORA Rivas (CD/FMLN/MNR) 24.09%, Fidel
  CHAVEZ Mena (PDC) 16.39%, other 10.49%; because no candidate received
  a majority, run off election was held 24 April 1994; results - Armando
  CALDERON SOL (ARENA) 68.35%, Ruben ZAMORA Rivas (CD/FMLN/MNR) 31.65%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly (Asamblea Legislativa): 
  elections last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held March 1997);
  results - ARENA 46.4%, FMLN 25.0%, PDC 21.4%, PCN 4.8%, other 2.4%;
  seats - (84 total) ARENA 39, FMLN 21, PDC 18, PCN 4, other 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Republican Alliance (ARENA); Farabundo Marti National
  Liberation Front (FMLN) has five factions - Popular Liberation Forces
  (FPL), Armed Forces of National Resistance (FARN), Popular Expression
  of Renewal (ERP), Salvadoran Communist Party (PCES), and
  Central American Workers' Revolutionary Party (PRTC); Christian
  Democratic Party (PDC); National Conciliation Party (PCN); Democratic
  Convergence (CD), a coalition of three parties - the Social Democratic
  Party (PSD), Democratic Nationalist Union (UDN), and the Popular
  Social Christian Movement (MPSC); Authentic Christian Movement (MAC)
note: 
  new party leaders not yet designated at time of publication
Other political or pressure groups: 
labor organizations: 
  Salvadoran Communal Union (UCS), peasant association; General
  Confederation of Workers (CGT), moderate; United Workers Front (FUT)
business organizations: 
  Productive Alliance (AP), conservative; National Federation of
  Salvadoran Small Businessmen (FENAPES), conservative
Member of: 
  BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA
  (observer), LORCS, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ana Cristina SOL 
chancery: 
  2308 California Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-9671 or 9672 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, and San
  Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Alan H. FLANIGAN 
embassy: 
  Final Boulevard, Station Antigua Cuscatlan, San Salvador 
mailing address: 
  Unit 3116, San Salvador; APO AA 34023 
telephone: 
  [503] 78-4444 
FAX: 
  [503] 78-6011 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and blue with the
  national coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of arms
  features a round emblem encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE EL
  SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL; similar to the flag of Nicaragua,
  which has a different coat of arms centered in the white band - it
  features a triangle encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on
  top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom; also similar to the flag of
  Honduras, which has five blue stars arranged in an X pattern centered
  in the white band

@El Salvador, Economy

Overview: 
  The agricultural sector accounts for 24% of GDP, employs about 40% of
  the labor force, and contributes about 66% to total exports. Coffee is
  the major commercial crop, accounting for 45% of export earnings. The
  manufacturing sector, based largely on food and beverage processing,
  accounts for 19% of GDP and 15% of employment. In 1992-93 the
  government made substantial progress toward privatization and
  deregulation of the economy. Growth in national output in 1990-93
  exceeded growth in population for the first time since 1987, and
  inflation in 1993 of 12% was down from 17% in 1992
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $14.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  12% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  6.7% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $846 million 
expenditures: 
  $890 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $730 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  coffee, sugarcane, shrimp
partners: 
  US, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Germany
Imports: 
  $1.9 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  raw materials, consumer goods, capital goods
partners: 
  US, Guatemala, Mexico, Venezuela, Germany
External debt: 
  $2.6 billion (December 1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7.6% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  713,800 kW
production: 
  2.19 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  390 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, beverages, petroleum, nonmetallic products, tobacco,
  chemicals, textiles, furniture
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 24% of GDP and 40% of labor force (including fishing and
  forestry); coffee most important commercial crop; other products -
  sugarcane, corn, rice, beans, oilseeds, beef, dairy products, shrimp;
  not self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine; marijuana produced for local
  consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $2.95 billion (plus $250
  million for 1992-96); Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF
  bilateral commitments (1970-89), $525 million 
Currency: 
  1 Salvadoran colon (C) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Salvadoran colones (C) per US$1 - 8.720 (January 1994), 8.670 (1993),
  8.4500 (1992), 8.080 (1991), 8.0300 (1990), fixed rate of 5.000
  (1986-1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@El Salvador, Communications

Railroads: 
  602 km 0.914-meter gauge, single track; some sections abandoned,
  unusable, or operating at reduced capacity
Highways: 
total: 
  10,000 km 
paved: 
  1,500 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 4,100 km; improved, unimproved earth 4,400 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Rio Lempa partially navigable
Ports: 
  Acajutla, Cutuco
Airports: 
total: 
  107 
usable: 
  76 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  6 
Telecommunications: 
  nationwide trunk microwave radio relay system; connection into Central
  American Microwave System; 116,000 telephones (21 telephones per 1,000
  persons); broadcast stations - 77 AM, no FM, 5 TV, 2 shortwave; 1
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@El Salvador, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,351,641; fit for military service 866,010; reach
  military age (18) annually 74,181 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $104 million, 1.1% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Equatorial Guinea, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Cameroon
  and Gabon
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  28,050 sq km 
land area: 
  28,050 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 539 km, Cameroon 189 km, Gabon 350 km 
Coastline: 
  296 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary dispute with Gabon because of disputed sovereignty
  over islands in Corisco Bay
Climate: 
  tropical; always hot, humid
Terrain: 
  coastal plains rise to interior hills; islands are volcanic
Natural resources: 
  timber, petroleum, small unexploited deposits of gold, manganese,
  uranium 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  51% 
other: 
  33% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  subject to violent windstorms
international agreements: 
  party to - Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  insular and continental regions rather widely separated

@Equatorial Guinea, People

Population: 
  409,550 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.59% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  40.65 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  14.73 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  102.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  52.09 years 
male: 
  49.97 years 
female: 
  54.27 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.28 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Equatorial Guinean(s) or Equatoguinean(s) 
adjective: 
  Equatorial Guinean or Equatoguinean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Bioko (primarily Bubi, some Fernandinos), Rio Muni (primarily Fang),
  Europeans less than 1,000, mostly Spanish
Religions: 
  nominally Christian and predominantly Roman Catholic, pagan practices 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), pidgin English, Fang, Bubi, Ibo 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  50% 
male: 
  64% 
female: 
  37% 
Labor force: 
  172,000 (1986 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 66%, services 23%, industry 11% (1980)
note: 
  labor shortages on plantations; 58% of population of working age
  (1985)

@Equatorial Guinea, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Equatorial Guinea 
conventional short form: 
  Equatorial Guinea 
local long form: 
  Republica de Guinea Ecuatorial 
local short form: 
  Guinea Ecuatorial 
former: 
  Spanish Guinea 
Digraph: 
  EK
Type: 
  republic in transition to multiparty democracy 
Capital: 
  Malabo 
Administrative divisions: 
  7 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Annobon, Bioko Norte,
  Bioko Sur, Centro Sur, Kie-Ntem, Litoral, Wele-Nzas
Independence: 
  12 October 1968 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 12 October (1968) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution 17 November 1991
Legal system: 
  partly based on Spanish civil law and tribal custom
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Brig. Gen. (Ret.) Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO (since 3
  August 1979) election last held 25 June 1989 (next to be held 25 June
  1996); results - President Brig. Gen. (Ret.) Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA
  MBASOGO was reelected without opposition
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Silvestre SIALE BILEKA (since 17 January 1992); Vice
  Prime Minister Anatolio NDONG MBA (since November 1993); 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of People's Representatives: 
  (Camara de Representantes del Pueblo) elections last held 21 November
  1993; seats - (82 total) PDGE 72, various opposition parties 10
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Tribunal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  ruling - Democratic Party for Equatorial Guinea (PDGE), Brig. Gen.
  (Ret.) Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO, party leader; Progressive
  Democratic Alliance (ADP), Antonio-Ebang Mbele Abang, president;
  Popular Action of Equatorial Guinea (APGE),Casiano Masi Edu, leader;
  Liberal Democratic Convention (CLD), Alfonso Nsue MOKUY, president;
  Convergence for Social Democracy (CPDS),Santiago Obama Ndong,
  president; Social Democratic and Popular Convergence (CSDP), Secundino
  Oyono Agueng Ada, general secretary; Party of the Social Democratic
  Coalition (PCSD), Buenaventura Moswi M'Asumu, general coordinater;
  Liberal Party (PL), leaders unknown; Party of Progress (PP), Severo
  MOTO Nsa, president; Social Democratic Party (PSD), Benjamin-Gabriel
  Balingha Balinga Alene, general secretary; Socialist Party of
  Equatorial Guinea (PSGE), Tomas MICHEBE Fernandez, general secretary;
  National Democratic Union (UDENA), Jose MECHEBA Ikaka, president;
  Democratic Social Union (UDS), Jesus Nze Obama Avomo, general
  secretary; Popular Union (UP), Juan Bitui, president
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC,
  ITU, LORCS (associate), NAM, OAS (observer), OAU, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador DAMASO Obiang Ndong 
chancery: 
  (temporary) 57 Magnolia Avenue, Mount Vernon, NY 10553 
telephone: 
  (914) 738-9584 or 667-6913 
FAX: 
  (914) 667-6838 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John E. BENNETT 
embassy: 
  Calle de Los Ministros, Malabo 
mailing address: 
  P.O. Box 597, Malabo 
telephone: 
  [240] (9) 2185, 2406, 2507 
FAX: 
  [240] (9) 2164 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and red with a
  blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side and the coat of arms
  centered in the white band; the coat of arms has six yellow
  six-pointed stars (representing the mainland and five offshore
  islands) above a gray shield bearing a silk-cotton tree and below
  which is a scroll with the motto UNIDAD, PAZ, JUSTICIA (Unity, Peace,
  Justice)

@Equatorial Guinea, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture, forestry, and fishing account for about half of GDP and
  nearly all exports. Subsistence farming predominates. Although
  pre-independence Equatorial Guinea counted on cocoa production for
  hard currency earnings, the deterioration of the rural economy under
  successive brutal regimes has diminished potential for agriculture-led
  growth. A number of AID programs sponsored by the World Bank and the
  international donor community have failed to revitalize export
  agriculture. There is little industry; businesses for the most part
  are owned by government officials and their family members. Commerce
  accounts for about 8% of GDP and the construction, public works, and
  service sectors for about 38%. Undeveloped natural resources include
  titanium, iron ore, manganese, uranium, and alluvial gold. Oil
  exploration, taking place under concessions offered to US, French, and
  Spanish firms, has been moderately successful. Increased production
  from recently discovered natural gas fields will provide a greater
  share of exports by 1995.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $280 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.6% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $32.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $35.9 million, including capital expenditures of $3 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $52.8 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  coffee, timber, cocoa beans
partners: 
  Spain 55.2%, Nigeria 11.4%, Cameroon 9.1% (1992)
Imports: 
  $63.6 million (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  petroleum, food, beverages, clothing, machinery
partners: 
  Cameroon 23.1%, Spain 21.8%, France 14.1%, US 4.3%
External debt: 
  $260 million (1992 est)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -6.5% (1992 est.); accounts for 5% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  23,000 kW
production: 
  60 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  160 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  fishing, sawmilling
Agriculture: 
  accounts for almost 50% of GDP, cash crops - timber and coffee from
  Rio Muni, cocoa from Bioko; food crops - rice, yams, cassava, bananas,
  oil palm nuts, manioc, livestock
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY81-89), $14 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $130
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $55 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 273,16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Equatorial Guinea, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,760 km (2,460 km on Rio Muni and 300 km on Bioko)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Malabo, Bata
Merchant marine: 
  2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,412 GRT/6,699 DWT, cargo 1,
  passenger-cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  poor system with adequate government services; international
  communications from Bata and Malabo to African and European countries;
  2,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 1 Indian
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Equatorial Guinea, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, National Guard, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 86,957; fit for military service 44,174 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Eritrea, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, bordering the Red Sea between Djibouti and Sudan
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  121,320 sq km 
land area: 
  121,320 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Pennsylvania
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,630 km, Djibouti 113 km, Ethiopia 912 km, Sudan 605 km 
Coastline: 
  1,151 km (land and island coastline is 2,234 km)
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  hot, dry desert strip along Red Sea coast; cooler and wetter in the
  central highlands (up to 61 cm of rainfall annually); semiarid in
  western hills and lowlands; rainfall heaviest during June-September
  except on coast desert
Terrain: 
  dominated by extension of Ethiopian north-south trending highlands,
  descending on the east to a coastal desert plan, on the northwest to
  hilly terrain and on the southwest to flat-to-rolling plains
Natural resources: 
  gold, potash, zinc, copper, salt, probably oil, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  2% (coffee)
meadows and pastures: 
  40% 
forest and woodland: 
  5% 
other: 
  50% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  famine; deforestation; soil erosion; overgrazing; loss of
  infrastructure from civil warfare
natural hazards: 
  frequent droughts
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategic geopolitical position along world's busiest shipping lanes
  and close to Arabian oilfields, Eritrea retained the entire coastline
  of Ethiopia along the Red Sea upon de jure independence from Ethiopia
  on 27 April 1993

@Eritrea, People

Population: 
  3,782,543 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.41% (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Eritrean(s) 
adjective: 
  Eritrean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  ethnic Tigrays 50%, Tigre and Kunama 40%, Afar 4%, Saho (Red Sea coast
  dwellers) 3% 
Religions: 
  Muslim, Coptic Christian, Roman Catholic, Protestant 
Languages: 
  Tigre and Kunama, Cushitic dialects, Tigre, Nora Bana, Arabic 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Eritrea, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  State of Eritrea 
conventional short form: 
  Eritrea 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Eritrea Autonomous Region in Ethiopia 
Digraph: 
  ER
Type: 
  transitional government 
note: 
  on 29 May 1991 ISSAIAS Afeworke, secretary general of the Eritrean
  People's Liberation Front (EPLF), announced the formation of the
  Provisional Government in Eritrea (PGE), in preparation for the 23-25
  April 1993 referendum on independence for the autonomous region of
  Eritrea; the result was a landslide vote for independence that was
  announced on 27 April 1993
Capital: 
  Asmara (formerly Asmera) 
Administrative divisions: 
  7 provinces; Akale Guzay, Baraka, Denakil, Hamasen, Samhar, Seraye,
  Sahil (1993)
Independence: 
  27 May 1993 (from Ethiopia; formerly the Eritrea Autonomous Region)
National holiday: 
  National Day (independence from Ethiopia), 24 May (1993) 
Constitution: 
  transitional "constitution" decreed 19 May 1993
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President ISSAIAS Afeworke (since 22 May 1993) 
cabinet: 
  State Council; the collective executive authority
note: 
  election to be held before 20 May 1997
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  EPLF Central Committee serves as the country's legislative body until
  multinational elections are held (before 20 May 1997)
Judicial branch: 
  Judiciary 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) (Christian Muslim), ISSAIAS
  Aferworke, PETROS Solomon; Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF) (Muslim),
  ABDULLAH Muhammed; Eritrean Liberation Front - United Organization
  (ELF-UO), Mohammed Said NAWUD; Eritrean Liberation Front -
  Revolutionary Council (ELF-RC), Ahmed NASSER
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Eritrean Islamic Jihad (EIJ); Islamic Militant Group
Member of: 
  OAU, ACP, AfDB, ECA, ILO, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), ITU, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Hagos GEBREHIWOT 
chancery: 
  Suite 400, 910 17th Street NW, Washington DC 20006 
telephone: 
  (202) 429-1991 
FAX: 
  (202) 429-9004 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Robert G. HOUDEK 
embassy: 
  34 Zera Yacob St., Asmara 
mailing address: 
  P.O. Box 211, Asmara 
telephone: 
  [291] (1) 123-720 
FAX: 
  [291] (1) 127-584 
Flag: 
  red isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) dividing the flag
  into two right triangles; the upper triangle is green, the lower one
  is blue; a gold wreath encircling a gold olive branch is centered on
  the hoist side of the red triangle

@Eritrea, Economy

Overview: 
  With independence from Ethiopia on 27 April 1993, Eritrea faces the
  bitter economic problems of a small, desperately poor African country.
  Most of the population will continue to depend on subsistence farming.
  Domestic output is substantially augmented by worker remittances from
  abroad. Government revenues come from custom duties and income and
  sales taxes. Eritrea has inherited the entire coastline of Ethiopia
  and has long-term prospects for revenues from the development of
  offshore oil, offshore fishing and tourism. For the time being,
  Ethiopia will be largely dependent on Eritrean ports for its foreign
  trade.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  NA kW
production: 
  NA kWh
consumption per capita: 
  NA kWh
Industries: 
  food processing, beverages, clothing and textiles
Agriculture: 
  products - sorghum, livestock (including goats), fish, lentils,
  vegetables, maize, cotton, tobacco, coffee, sisal (for making rope)
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 birr (Br) = 100 cents; at present, Ethiopian currency used
Exchange rates: 
  1 birr (Br) per US$1 - 5.000 (fixed rate since 1992)
Fiscal year: 
  NA

@Eritrea, Communications

Railroads: 
  307 km total; 307 km 1.000-meter gauge; 307 km 0.950-meter gauge
  (nonoperational) linking Ak'ordat and Asmara (formerly Asmera) with
  the port of Massawa (formerly Mits'iwa; 1993 est.)
Highways: 
total: 
  3,845 km 
paved: 
  807 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 840 km; improved earth 402 km; unimproved earth 1,796 km 
Ports: 
  Assab (formerly Aseb), Massawa (formerly Mits'iwa)
Merchant marine: 
  none
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  5 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  NA

@Eritrea, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Estonia, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between Sweden and Russia
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Asia, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  45,100 sq km 
land area: 
  43,200 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Hampshire and Vermont combined
note: 
  includes 1,520 islands in the Baltic Sea
Land boundaries: 
  total 557 km, Latvia 267 km, Russia 290 km 
Coastline: 
  1,393 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  maritime, wet, moderate winters, cool summers
Terrain: 
  marshy, lowlands
Natural resources: 
  shale oil, peat, phosphorite, amber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  22% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  11% 
forest and woodland: 
  31% 
other: 
  36% 
Irrigated land: 
  110 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air heavily polluted with sulfur dioxide from oil-shale burning power
  plants in northeast; contamination of soil and ground water with
  petroleum products, chemicals at military bases
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Hazardous Wastes, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified
  - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Population: 
  1,616,882 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.52% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.98 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.04 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.29 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  19.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.96 years 
male: 
  64.98 years 
female: 
  75.19 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Estonian(s) 
adjective: 
  Estonian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Estonian 61.5%, Russian 30.3%, Ukrainian 3.17%, Byelorussian 1.8%,
  Finn 1.1%, other 2.13% (1989)
Religions: 
  Lutheran 
Languages: 
  Estonian (official), Latvian, Lithuanian, Russian, other 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1989)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  750,000 (1992)
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 42%, agriculture and forestry 20%, other 38%
  (1990)

@Estonia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Estonia 
conventional short form: 
  Estonia 
local long form: 
  Eesti Vabariik 
local short form: 
  Eesti 
former: 
  Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  EN
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Tallinn 
Administrative divisions: 
  15 counties (maakonnad, singular - maakond) and 6 municipalities*:
  Harju maakond (Tallinn), Hiiu maakond (Kardla), Ida-Viru maakond
  (Johvi), Jarva maakond (Paide), Jogeva maakond (Jogeva),
  Kohtla-Jarve*, Laane maakond (Haapsalu), Laane-Viru maakond (Rakvere),
  Narva*, Parnu*, Parnu maakond (Parnu), Polva maakond (Polva), Rapla
  maakond (Rapla), Saare maakond (Kuessaare), Sillamae*, Tallinn*,
  Tartu*, Tartu maakond (Tartu), Valga maakond (Valga), Viljandi maakond
  (Viljandi), Voru maakond (Voru)
note: 
  county centers are in parentheses
Independence: 
  6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 24 February (1918) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 28 June 1992
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; no judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Lennart MERI (since 21 October 1992); election last held 20
  September 1992; (next to be held NA 1997); results - no candidate
  received majority; newly elected Parliament elected Lennart MERI (21
  October 1992)
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Mart LAAR (since 21 October 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister, authorized by
  the legislature
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Riigikogu): 
  elections last held 20 September 1992; (next to be held NA); results -
  Fatherland 21%, Safe Haven 14%, Popular Front 13%, M 10%, ENIP 8%, ERP
  7%, ERL 7%, EP 2%, other 18%; seats - (101 total) Fatherland 29, Safe
  Haven 18, Popular Front 15, M 12, ENIP 10, ERP 8, ERL 8, EP 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Coalition Party 'Pro Patria' (Isamaa of Fatherland), Mart
  LAAR, president, made up of 4 parties: Christian Democratic Party
  (KDE), Aivar KALA, chairman; Christian Democratic Union (KDL), Illar
  HALLASTE, chairman; Conservative People's Party (KR), Enn TARTO,
  chairman; Republican Coalition Party (VK), Leo STARKOV, chairman;
  Moderates (M), made up of two parties: Estonian Social Democratic
  Party (ESDB), Marju LAURISTIN, chairman; Estonian Rural Center Pary
  (EMK), Ivar RAIG, chairman; Estonian National Independence Party
  (ENIP), Tunne KELAM, chairman; Liberal Democratic Party (LDP),
  Paul-Eerik RUMMO, chairman; Safe Haven, made up of three parties:
  Estonian Coalition Party (EK), Tiit VAHI, chairman; Estonian Rural
  Union (EM), Arvo SIRENDI, chairman; Estonian Democratic Justice
  Union/Estonian Pensioners' League (EDO/EPU), Harri KARTNER, chairman;
  Estonian Centrist Party (EK), Edgar SAVISAAR, chairman; Estonian
  Democratic Labor Party (EDT), Vaino VALJAS, chairman; Estonian Green
  Party (ERL), Tonu OJA; Estonian Royalist Party (ERP), Kalle KULBOK,
  chairman; Entrepreneurs' Party (EP), Tiit MADE; Estonian Citizen
  (EKL), Juri TOOMEPUU, chairman
Member of: 
  BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NACC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Toomas Hendrik ILVES 
chancery: 
  1030 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005, Suite 1000 
telephone: 
  (202) 789-0320 
FAX: 
  (202) 789-0471 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Robert C. FRASURE 
embassy: 
  Kentmanni 20, Tallin EE 0001 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  011-[372] (6) 312-021 through 024 
FAX: 
  [372] (6) 312-025 
Flag: 
  pre-1940 flag restored by Supreme Soviet in May 1990 - three equal
  horizontal bands of blue (top), black, and white

@Estonia, Economy

Overview: 
  Bolstered by a widespread national desire to reintegrate into Western
  Europe, the Estonian government has pursued a program of market
  reforms and rough stabilization measures, which is rapidly
  transforming the economy. Two years after independence - and one year
  after the introduction of the kroon - Estonians are beginning to reap
  tangible benefits; inflation is low; production declines appear to
  have bottomed out; and living standards are rising. Economic
  restructuring is clearly underway with the once-dominant
  energy-intensive heavy industrial sectors giving way to
  labor-intensive light industry and the underdeveloped service sector.
  The private sector is growing rapidly; the share of the state
  enterprises in retail trade has steadily declined and by June 1993
  accounted for only 12.5% of total turnover, and 70,000 new jobs have
  reportedly been created as a result of new business start-ups.
  Estonia's foreign trade has shifted rapidly from East to West with the
  Western industrialized countries now accounting for two-thirds of
  foreign trade.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $8.8 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Estonian statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,480 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.6% per month (1993 average)
Unemployment rate: 
  3.5% (May 1993); but large number of underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $223 million 
expenditures: 
  $142 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $765 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  textile 14%, food products 11%, vehicles 11%, metals 11% (1993)
partners: 
  Russia, Finland, Latvia, Germany, Ukraine
Imports: 
  $865 million (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery 18%, fuels 15%, vehicles 14%, textiles 10% (1993)
partners: 
  Finland, Russia, Sweden, Germany, Netherlands
External debt: 
  $650 million (end of 1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -27% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,700,000 kW
production: 
  22.9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  14,245 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  accounts for 42% of labor force; oil shale, shipbuilding, phosphates,
  electric motors, excavators, cement, furniture, clothing, textiles,
  paper, shoes, apparel
Agriculture: 
  employs 20% of work force; very efficient by Soviet standards; net
  exports of meat, fish, dairy products, and potatoes; imports of
  feedgrains for livestock; fruits and vegetables
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for illicit drugs from Central and Southwest Asia
  and Latin America to Western Europe; limited illicit opium producer;
  mostly for domestic consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (1992), $10 million 
Currency: 
  1 Estonian kroon (EEK) = 100 cents (introduced in August 1992)
Exchange rates: 
  kroons (EEK) per US$1 - 13.9 (January 1994), 13.2 (1993); note -
  kroons are tied to the German Deutschmark at a fixed rate of 8 to 1
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Estonia, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,030 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  30,300 km 
paved or gravelled: 
  29,200 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 1,100 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  500 km perennially navigable
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 420 km (1992)
Ports: 
  coastal - Tallinn, Novotallin, Parnu; inland - Narva
Merchant marine: 
  69 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 406,405 GRT/537,016 DWT, bulk 6,
  cargo 50, container 2, oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6,
  short-sea passenger 4 
Airports: 
total: 
  29 
usable: 
  18 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  8 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  Estonia's telephone system is antiquated and supports about 400,000
  domestic telephone circuits, i.e. 25 telephones for each 100 persons;
  improvements are being made piecemeal, with emphasis on business needs
  and international connections; there are still about 150,000
  unfulfilled requests for telephone service; broadcast stations - 3 TV
  (provide Estonian programs as well Moscow Ostenkino's first and second
  programs); international traffic is carried to the other former USSR
  republics by land line or microwave and to other countries partly by
  leased connection to the Moscow international gateway switch, and
  partly by a new Tallinn-Helsinki fiber optic submarine cable which
  gives Estonia access to international circuits everywhere; substantial
  investment has been made in cellular systems which are operational
  throughout Estonia and also Latvia and which have access to the
  international packet switched digital network via Helsinki

@Estonia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Maritime Border Guard, National Guard (Kaitseliit),
  Security Forces (internal and border troops), Coast Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 392,135; fit for military service 308,951; reach
  military age (18) annually 11,789 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  124.4 million kroons, NA% of GDP (forecast for 1993); note -
  conversion of the military budget into US dollars using the current
  exchange rate could produce misleading results


@Ethiopia, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, between Somalia and Sudan
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,127,127 sq km 
land area: 
  1,119,683 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,311 km, Djibouti 337 km, Eritrea 912 km, Kenya 830 km, Somalia
  1,626 km, Sudan 1,606 km 
Coastline: 
  none - landlocked
Maritime claims: 
  none - landlocked
International disputes: 
  southern half of the boundary with Somalia is a Provisional
  Administrative Line; territorial dispute with Somalia over the Ogaden
Climate: 
  tropical monsoon with wide topographic-induced variation
Terrain: 
  high plateau with central mountain range divided by Great Rift Valley
Natural resources: 
  small reserves of gold, platinum, copper, potash 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  41% 
forest and woodland: 
  24% 
other: 
  22% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,620 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification; famine
natural hazards: 
  geologically active Great Rift Valley susceptible to earthquakes,
  volcanic eruptions; frequent droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  landlocked - entire coastline along the Red Sea was lost with the de
  jure independence of Eritrea on 27 April 1993

@Ethiopia, People

Population: 
  54,927,108 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  Ethiopian demographic data, except population and population growth
  rate, include Eritrea
Population growth rate: 
  3.4% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.01 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  13.89 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  106.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  52.67 years 
male: 
  51 years 
female: 
  54.38 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.81 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ethiopian(s) 
adjective: 
  Ethiopian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Oromo 40%, Amhara and Tigrean 32%, Sidamo 9%, Shankella 6%, Somali 6%,
  Afar 4%, Gurage 2%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 45%-50%, Ethiopian Orthodox 35%-40%, animist 12%, other 5%
Languages: 
  Amharic (official), Tigrinya, Orominga, Guaraginga, Somali, Arabic,
  English (major foreign language taught in schools)
Literacy: 
  age 10 and over can read and write (1984)
total population: 
  24% 
male: 
  33% 
female: 
  16% 
Labor force: 
  18 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and animal husbandry 80%, government and services 12%,
  industry and construction 8% (1985)

@Ethiopia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Ethiopia 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ityop'iya 
Digraph: 
  ET
Type: 
  transitional government 
note: 
  on 28 May 1991 the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front
  (EPRDF) toppled the authoritarian government of MENGISTU Haile-Mariam
  and took control in Addis Ababa; the Transitional Government of
  Ethiopia (TGE), announced a two-year transitional period
Capital: 
  Addis Ababa 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 administrative regions (astedader akababiwach, singular - astedader
  akababi) Addis Ababa, Afar, Amhara, Benishangul, Gambela,
  Gurage-Hadiya-Kambata, Harer, Kefa, Omo, Oromo, Sidamo, Somali,
  Tigray, Wolayta
Independence: 
  oldest independent country in Africa and one of the oldest in the
  world - at least 2,000 years
National holiday: 
  National Day, 28 May (1991) (defeat of Mengistu regime)
Constitution: 
  to be redrafted by 1993
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President MELES Zenawi (since 1 June 1991); election last held 10
  September 1987; next election planned after new constitution drafted;
  results - MENGISTU Haile-Mariam elected by the now defunct National
  Assembly, but resigned and left Ethiopia on 21 May 1991
head of government: 
  Prime Minister TAMIRAT Layne (since 6 June 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; designated by the chairman of the Council of
  Representatives
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Constituent Assembly: 
  elections were held on 5 June 1994 (next to be held NA); results - NA;
  a major task of the new Assembly will be to ratify the constitution to
  drafted by the end of 1994
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), MELES
  Zenawi; Oromo People's Democratic Organization (OPDO), Kuma DEMEKSA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Oromo Liberation Front (OLF); Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party
  (EPRP); numerous small, ethnic-based groups have formed since
  Mengistu's resignation, including several Islamic militant groups
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS,
  NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador BERHANE Gebre-Christos 
chancery: 
  2134 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-2281 or 2282 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-7950 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Marc A. BAAS 
embassy: 
  Entoto Street, Addis Ababa 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1014, Addis Ababa 
telephone: 
  [251] (1) 550-666 
FAX: 
  [251] (1) 552-191 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), yellow, and red; Ethiopia
  is the oldest independent country in Africa, and the colors of her
  flag were so often adopted by other African countries upon
  independence that they became known as the pan-African colors

@Ethiopia, Economy

Overview: 
  With the independence of Eritrea on 27 April 1993, Ethiopia continues
  to face difficult economic problems as one of the poorest and least
  developed countries in Africa. (The accompanying analysis and figures
  predate the independence of Eritrea.) Its economy is based on
  subsistence agriculture, which accounts for about 45% of GDP, 90% of
  exports, and 80% of total employment; coffee generates 60% of export
  earnings. The manufacturing sector is heavily dependent on inputs from
  the agricultural sector. Over 90% of large-scale industry, but less
  than 10% of agriculture, is state run; the government is considering
  selling off a portion of state-owned plants. Favorable agricultural
  weather largely explains the 4.5% growth in output in FY89, whereas
  drought and deteriorating internal security conditions prevented
  growth in FY90. In 1991 the lack of law and order, particularly in the
  south, interfered with economic development and growth. In 1992,
  because of some easing of civil strife and aid from the outside world,
  the economy substantially improved.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $22.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.8% (FY93 est)
National product per capita: 
  $400 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  21% (1992 est)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $189 million (f.o.b., FY91)
commodities: 
  coffee, leather products, gold, petroleum products
partners: 
  Germany, Japan, Saudi Arabia, France, Italy
Imports: 
  $472 million (c.i.f., FY91)
commodities: 
  capital goods, consumer goods, fuel
partners: 
  US, Germany, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Japan
External debt: 
  $3.48 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -3.3% (FY92); accounts for 12% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  330,000 kW
production: 
  650 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  10 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  food processing, beverages, textiles, chemicals, metals processing,
  cement
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 47% of GDP and is the most important sector of the
  economy even though frequent droughts and poor cultivation practices
  keep farm output low; famines not uncommon; export crops of coffee and
  oilseeds grown partly on state farms; estimated 50% of agricultural
  production at subsistence level; principal crops and livestock -
  cereals, pulses, coffee, oilseeds, sugarcane, potatoes and other
  vegetables, hides and skins, cattle, sheep, goats
Illicit drugs: 
  transit hub for heroin originating in Southwest and Southeast Asia and
  destined for Europe and North America as well as cocaine destined for
  southern African markets; cultivates qat (chat) for local use and
  regional export
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $504 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $3.4
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $8 million; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $2 billion 
Currency: 
  1 birr (Br) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  birr (Br) per US$1 - 5.0000 (fixed rate since 1992); fixed at 2.070
  before 1992
Fiscal year: 
  8 July - 7 July

@Ethiopia, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  24,127 km 
paved: 
  3,289 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 6,664 km; improved earth 1,652 km; unimproved earth 12,522 km
  (1993)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Merchant marine: 
  12 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 62,627 GRT/88,909 DWT, cargo 8,
  livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 2, roll on/roll off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  120 
usable: 
  84 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  15 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  83 
Telecommunications: 
  open-wire and radio relay system adequate for government use;
  open-wire to Sudan and Djibouti; microwave radio relay to Kenya and
  Djibouti; broadcast stations - 4 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 100,000 TV sets;
  9,000,000 radios; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  and 2 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT

@Ethiopia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 13,229,078; fit for military service 6,867,582; reach
  military age (18) annually 596,691 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Europa Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (possession of France) 

@Europa Island, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the southern Mozambique Channel about halfway
  between Madagascar and Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa 
Area: 
total area: 
  28 sq km 
land area: 
  28 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.2 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  22.2 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Madagascar
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  NA
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA% (heavily wooded)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  wildlife sanctuary

@Europa Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Europa Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Europa Island 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ile Europa 
Digraph: 
  EU
Type: 
  French possession administered by Commissioner of the Republic;
  resident in Reunion
Capital: 
  none; administered by France from Reunion
Independence: 
  none (possession of France)

@Europa Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Europa Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,439-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  1 meteorological station

@Europa Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), Geography

Location: 
  Southern South America, in the South Atlantic Ocean, off the southern
  coast of Argentina
Map references: 
  Antarctic Region, South America 
Area: 
total area: 
  12,170 sq km 
land area: 
  12,170 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Connecticut
note: 
  includes the two main islands of East and West Falkland and about 200
  small islands
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,288 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  100-m depth
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  administered by the UK, claimed by Argentina
Climate: 
  cold marine; strong westerly winds, cloudy, humid; rain occurs on more
  than half of days in year; occasional snow all year, except in January
  and February, but does not accumulate
Terrain: 
  rocky, hilly, mountainous with some boggy, undulating plains
Natural resources: 
  fish, wildlife 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  99% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  1% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  deeply indented coast provides good natural harbors; short growing
  season

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), People

Population: 
  2,261 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.43% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  NA
Death rate: 
  NA
Net migration rate: 
  NA
Infant mortality rate: 
  NA
Life expectancy at birth: 
  NA
Total fertility rate: 
  NA
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Falkland Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Falkland Island 
Ethnic divisions: 
  British 
Religions: 
  primarily Anglican, Roman Catholic, United Free Church, Evangelist
  Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Lutheran, Seventh-Day Adventist 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1,100 (est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 95% (mostly sheepherding)

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Colony of the Falkland Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
Digraph: 
  FA
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Stanley 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 14 June (1982) 
Constitution: 
  3 October 1985
Legal system: 
  English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Governor David Everard TATHAM (since August 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; 3 members elected by the Legislative Council, 2
  ex-officio members (chief executive and the financial secretary), and
  the governor
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council: 
  elections last held 11 October 1989 (next to be held October 1994);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (10 total, 8 elected)
  number of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ICFTU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Falkland Island coat of arms in a white disk centered on the outer
  half of the flag; the coat of arms contains a white ram (sheep raising
  is the major economic activity) above the sailing ship Desire (whose
  crew discovered the islands) with a scroll at the bottom bearing the
  motto DESIRE THE RIGHT

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on sheep farming, which directly or indirectly
  employs most of the work force. A few dairy herds are kept to meet
  domestic consumption of milk and milk products, and crops grown are
  primarily those for providing winter fodder. Exports feature shipments
  of high-grade wool to the UK and the sale of postage stamps and coins.
  Rich stocks of fish in the surrounding waters are not presently
  exploited by the islanders. So far, efforts to establish a domestic
  fishing industry have been unsuccessful. In 1987 the government began
  selling fishing licenses to foreign trawlers operating within the
  Falklands exclusive fishing zone. These license fees amount to more
  than $40 million per year and are a primary source of income for the
  government. To encourage tourism, the Falkland Islands Development
  Corporation has built three lodges for visitors attracted by the
  abundant wildlife and trout fishing.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7.4% (1980-87 average)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%; labor shortage
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $62.7 million 
expenditures: 
  $42.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY90)
Exports: 
  at least $14.7 million 
commodities: 
  wool, hides and skins, and meat
partners: 
  UK, Netherlands, Japan (1987 est.)
Imports: 
  at least $13.9 million 
commodities: 
  food, clothing, fuels, and machinery
partners: 
  UK, Netherlands Antilles (Curacao), Japan (1987 est.)
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  9,200 kW
production: 
  17 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,940 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  wool and fish processing
Agriculture: 
  predominantly sheep farming; small dairy herds; some fodder and
  vegetable crops
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1992-93), $87 million 
Currency: 
  1 Falkland pound (#F) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Falkland pound (#F) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6658 (1993),
  0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5604 (1990), 0.6099 (1989); note - the
  Falkland pound is at par with the British pound
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  510 km 
paved: 
  30 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 80 km; unimproved earth 400 km 
Ports: 
  Stanley
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  5 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  government-operated radiotelephone and private VHF/CB radio networks
  provide effective service to almost all points on both islands; 590
  telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 3 FM, no TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station with links through London to other countries

@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), Defense Forces

Branches: 
  British Forces Falkland Islands (including Army, Royal Air Force,
  Royal Navy, and Royal Marines), Police Force 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Faroe Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (part of the Danish realm) 

@Faroe Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic States, Northern Europe in the north Atlantic Ocean, located
  half way between Norway and Iceland
Map references: 
  Arctic Region 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,400 sq km 
land area: 
  1,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than eight times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  764 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  mild winters, cool summers; usually overcast; foggy, windy
Terrain: 
  rugged, rocky, some low peaks; cliffs along most of coast
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  98% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  archipelago of 18 inhabited islands and a few uninhabited islets;
  strategically located along important sea lanes in northeastern
  Atlantic; precipitous terrain limits habitation to small coastal
  lowlands

@Faroe Islands, People

Population: 
  48,427 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.83% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  17.97 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.56 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.1 years 
male: 
  74.71 years 
female: 
  81.62 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.47 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Faroese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Faroese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Scandinavian 
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 
Languages: 
  Faroese (derived from Old Norse), Danish 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  17,585 
by occupation: 
  largely engaged in fishing, manufacturing, transportation, and
  commerce

@Faroe Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Faroe Islands 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Foroyar 
Digraph: 
  FO
Type: 
  part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas administrative
  division of Denmark
Capital: 
  Torshavn 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)
Independence: 
  none (part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas administrative
  division of Denmark)
National holiday: 
  Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940) 
Constitution: 
  5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)
Legal system: 
  Danish
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen MARGRETHE II (since 14 January 1972), represented by High
  Commissioner Bent KLINTE (since NA) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Marita PETERSEN (since 18 January 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Landsstyri; elected by the local legislature
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Faroese Parliament (Lgting): 
  elections last held 17 November 1990 (next to be held November 1994);
  results - Social Democratic 27.4%, People's Party 21.9%, Cooperation
  Coalition Party 18.9%, Republican Party 14.7%, Home Rule 8.8%,
  PFIP-CPP 5.9%, other 2.4%; seats - (32 total) two-party coalition 17
  (Social Democratic 10, People's Party 7), Cooperation Coalition Party
  6, Republican Party 4, Home Rule 3, PFIP-CPP 2
Danish Parliament: 
  elections last held on 12 December 1990 (next to be held by December
  1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (2 total) Social
  Democratic 1, People's Party 1; note - the Faroe Islands elects two
  representatives to the Danish Parliament
Judicial branch: 
  none
Political parties and leaders: 
three-party ruling coalition: 
  Social Democratic Party, Marita PETERSEN; Republican Party, Signer
  HANSEN; Home Rule Party, Hilmar KASS
opposition: 
  Cooperation Coalition Party, Pauli ELLEFSEN; Progressive and Fishing
  Industry Party-Christian People's Party (PFIP-CPP), leader NA;
  Progress Party, leader NA; People's Party, Jogvan SUND-STEIN
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)
Flag: 
  white with a red cross outlined in blue that extends to the edges of
  the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side
  in the style of the DANNEBROG (Danish flag)

@Faroe Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The Faroese, who have long enjoyed the affluent living standards of
  the Danes and other Scandinavians, now must cope with the decline of
  the all-important fishing industry and one of the world's heaviest per
  capita external debts of nearly $30,000. When the nations of the world
  extended their fishing zones to 200 nautical miles in the early 1970s,
  the Faroese no longer could continue their traditional long-distance
  fishing and subsequently depleted their own nearby fishing areas. The
  government's tight controls on fish stocks and its austerity measures
  have caused a recession, and subsidy cuts will force nationalization
  in the fishing industry, which has already been plagued with
  bankruptcies. Copenhagen has threatened to withhold its annual subsidy
  of $130 million - roughly one-third of the islands' budget revenues -
  unless the Faroese make significant efforts to balance their budget.
  To this extent the Faroe government is expected to continue its tough
  policies, including introducing a 20% value-added tax (VAT) in 1993,
  and has agreed to an IMF economic-political stabilization plan. In
  addition to its annual subsidy, the Danish government has bailed out
  the second largest Faroe bank to the tune of $140 million since
  October 1992.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $662 million (1989 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1989 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $14,000 (1989 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1988)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.5% (1993 est)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $425 million 
expenditures: 
  $480 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $386 million (f.o.b., 1990 est.)
commodities: 
  fish and fish products 88%, animal feedstuffs, transport equipment
  (ships) (1989)
partners: 
  Denmark 20%, Germany 18.3%, UK 14.2%, France 11.2%, Spain 7.9%, US
  4.5%
Imports: 
  $322 million (c.i.f., 1990 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 24.4%, manufactures 24%, food and
  livestock 19%, fuels 12%, chemicals 6.5%
partners: 
  Denmark 43.8%, Norway 19.8%, Sweden 4.9%, Germany 4.2%, US 1.3%
External debt: 
  $1.3 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  80,000 kW
production: 
  280 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,760 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  fishing, shipbuilding, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 27% of GDP and employs 27% of labor force; principal
  crops - potatoes and vegetables; livestock - sheep; annual fish catch
  about 360,000 metric tons
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  receives an annual subsidy from Denmark of about $130 million
Currency: 
  1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere
Exchange rates: 
  Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1 - 6.771 (January 1994), 6.484 (1993),
  6.036 (1992), 6.396 (1991), 6.189 (1990), 7.310 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Faroe Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  200 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Torshavn, Tvoroyri
Merchant marine: 
  7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 19,943 GRT/18,399 DWT, cargo 5,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea passenger 1 
note: 
  a subset of the Danish register
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  good international communications; fair domestic facilities; 27,900
  telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, 3 (10 repeaters) FM, 3 (29
  repeaters) TV; 3 coaxial submarine cables

@Faroe Islands, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  small Police Force, no organized native military forces 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Denmark


@Fiji, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Melanesia, 2,500 km north of New Zealand in the South Pacific
  Ocean
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  18,270 sq km 
land area: 
  18,270 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,129 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation; rectilinear shelf claim added
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; only slight seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains of volcanic origin
Natural resources: 
  timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  65% 
other: 
  19% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  cyclonic storms can occur from November to January
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
Note: 
  includes 332 islands of which approximately 110 are inhabited

@Fiji, People

Population: 
  764,382 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.05% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.18 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.5 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -7.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.14 years 
male: 
  62.88 years 
female: 
  67.51 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.92 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Fijian(s) 
adjective: 
  Fijian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Fijian 49%, Indian 46%, European, other Pacific Islanders, overseas
  Chinese, and other 5% 
Religions: 
  Christian 52% (Methodist 37%, Roman Catholic 9%), Hindu 38%, Muslim
  8%, other 2% 
note: 
  Fijians are mainly Christian, Indians are Hindu, and there is a Muslim
  minority (1986)
Languages: 
  English (official), Fijian, Hindustani 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1985 est.)
total population: 
  86% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  81% 
Labor force: 
  235,000 
by occupation: 
  subsistence agriculture 67%, wage earners 18%, salary earners 15%
  (1987)

@Fiji, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Fiji 
conventional short form: 
  Fiji 
Digraph: 
  FJ
Type: 
  republic 
note: 
  military coup leader Maj. Gen. Sitiveni RABUKA formally declared Fiji
  a republic on 6 October 1987
Capital: 
  Suva 
Administrative divisions: 
  4 divisions and 1 dependency*; Central, Eastern, Northern, Rotuma*,
  Western
Independence: 
  10 October 1970 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 10 October (1970) 
Constitution: 
  10 October 1970 (suspended 1 October 1987); a new Constitution was
  proposed on 23 September 1988 and promulgated on 25 July 1990; the
  1990 Constitution is under review; the review will be complete by 1997
Legal system: 
  based on British system
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Ratu Sir Kamisese MARA (since 12 January 1994); First Vice
  President Ratu Sir Josaia TAIVAIQIA (since 12 January 1994); Second
  Vice President Ratu Inoke TAKIVEIKATA (since 12 January 1994); note -
  President GANILAU died on 15 December 1993 and Vice President MARA
  became acting president; MARA was elected president by the Great
  Council of Chiefs on 12 January 1994
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Sitiveni RABUKA (since 2 June 1992) 
Presidential Council: 
  appointed by the governor general
Great Council of Chiefs: 
  (highest ranking members of the traditional chiefly system)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by prime minister from members of Parliament and
  responsible to Parliament
Legislative branch: 
  the bicameral Parliament was dissolved following the coup of 14 May
  1987
Senate: 
  nonelective body containing 34 seats, 24 reserved for Melanesians, 9
  for Indians and others, 1 for the island of Rotuma
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 18-25 February 1994 (next to be held NA 1997);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (70 total, with ethnic
  Fijians allocated 37 seats, ethnic Indians 27 seats, and independents
  and other 6 seats) number of seats by party SVT 31, NFP 20, FLP 7, FA
  5, GVP 4, independents 2, ANC 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Fijian Political Party (SVT - primarily Fijian), leader Maj. Gen.
  Sitivini RABUKA; National Federation Party (NFP; primarily Indian),
  Jai Ram REDDY; Christian Fijian Nationalist Party (CFNP), Sakeasi
  BUTADROKA; Fiji Labor Party (FLP), Mahendra CHAUDHRY; All National
  Congress (ANC), Apisai TORA; General Voters Party (GVP), Max OLSSON;
  Fiji Conservative Party (FCP), Isireli VUIBAU; Conservative Party of
  Fiji (CPF), Jolale ULUDOLE and Viliame SAVU; Fiji Indian Liberal
  Party, Swami MAHARAJ; Fiji Indian Congress Party, Ishwari BAJPAI; Fiji
  Independent Labor (Muslim), leader NA; Four Corners Party, David
  TULVANUAVOU; Fijian Association (FA), Josevata KAMIKAMICA
Member of: 
  ACP, AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, PCA,
  SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNOMUR,
  UNTAC, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Pita Kewa NACUVA 
chancery: 
  Suite 240, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 337-8320 
FAX: 
  (202) 337-1996 
consulate(s): 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires William ROPE 
embassy: 
  31 Loftus Street, Suva 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 218, Suva 
telephone: 
  [679] 314-466 
FAX: 
  [679] 300-081 
Flag: 
  light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant
  and the Fijian shield centered on the outer half of the flag; the
  shield depicts a yellow lion above a white field quartered by the
  cross of Saint George featuring stalks of sugarcane, a palm tree,
  bananas, and a white dove

@Fiji, Economy

Overview: 
  Fiji's economy is primarily agricultural, with a large subsistence
  sector. Sugar exports and tourism are the major sources of foreign
  exchange. Industry contributes 13% to GDP, with sugar processing
  accounting for one-third of industrial activity. Roughly 250,000
  tourists visit each year. Political uncertainty and drought, however,
  contribute to substantial fluctuations in earnings from tourism and
  sugar. In 1992, growth was approximately 3%, based on growth in
  tourism and a lessening of labor-management disputes in the sugar and
  gold-mining sectors. In 1993, the government's budgeted growth rate of
  3% was not achieved because of a decline in non-sugar agricultural
  output and damage from Cyclone Kina.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5.6% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.9% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $455 million 
expenditures: 
  $546 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $417 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  sugar 40%, clothing, processed fish, gold, lumber
partners: 
  EC 26%, Australia 15%, Pacific Islands 11%, Japan 6%
Imports: 
  $517 million (c.i.f., 1992 est)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, petroleum products, food, consumer
  goods, chemicals
partners: 
  Australia 30%, NZ 17%, Japan 13%, EC 6%, US 6%
External debt: 
  $670 million (1994 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7.5% (1992 est.); accounts for 13% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  215,000 kW
production: 
  420 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  560 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  sugar, tourism, copra, gold, silver, clothing, lumber, small cottage
  industries
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 23% of GDP; principal cash crop is sugarcane; coconuts,
  cassava, rice, sweet potatoes, bananas; small livestock sector
  includes cattle, pigs, horses, and goats; fish catch nearly 33,000
  tons (1989)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1980-89), $815 million 
Currency: 
  1 Fijian dollar (F$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Fijian dollars (F$) per US$1 - 1.5239 (January 1994), 1.5418 (1993),
  1.5030 (1992), 1.4756 (1991), 1.4809 (1990), 1.4833 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Fiji, Communications

Railroads: 
  644 km 0.610-meter narrow gauge, belonging to the government-owned
  Fiji Sugar Corporation
Highways: 
total: 
  3,300 km 
paved: 
  1,590 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 1,290 km; unimproved earth 420
  km (1984)
Inland waterways: 
  203 km; 122 km navigable by motorized craft and 200-metric-ton barges
Ports: 
  Labasa, Lautoka, Savusavu, Suva
Merchant marine: 
  8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 44,911 GRT/54,490 DWT, cargo 1,
  chemical tanker 2, container 2, oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2
Airports: 
total: 
  25 
usable: 
  22 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  modern local, interisland, and international (wire/radio integrated)
  public and special-purpose telephone, telegraph, and teleprinter
  facilities; regional radio center; important COMPAC cable link between
  US-Canada and NZ-Australia; 53,228 telephones (71 telephones per 1,000
  persons); broadcast stations - 7 AM, 1 FM, no TV; 1 Pacific Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Fiji, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Republic of Fiji Military Forces (RFMF; including a naval division,
  police)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 197,767; fit for military service 109,026; reach
  military age (18) annually 8,154 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $22.4 million, about 2% of GDP (FY91/92)


@Finland, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea between Sweden
  and Russia
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  337,030 sq km 
land area: 
  305,470 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Montana
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,628 km, Norway 729 km, Sweden 586 km, Russia 1,313 km 
Coastline: 
  1,126 km (excludes islands and coastal indentations)
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  6 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  12 nm
territorial sea: 
  4 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  cold temperate; potentially subarctic, but comparatively mild because
  of moderating influence of the North Atlantic Current, Baltic Sea, and
  more than 60,000 lakes
Terrain: 
  mostly low, flat to rolling plains interspersed with lakes and low
  hills
Natural resources: 
  timber, copper, zinc, iron ore, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  76% 
other: 
  16% 
Irrigated land: 
  620 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from manufacturing and power plants contributing to acid
  rain; water pollution from industrial wastes, agricultural chemicals;
  habitat loss threatens wildlife populations
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic
  Treaty, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands,
  Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  long boundary with Russia; Helsinki is northernmost national capital
  on European continent; population concentrated on small southwestern
  coastal plain

@Finland, People

Population: 
  5,068,931 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.34% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.41 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.84 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.93 years 
male: 
  72.18 years 
female: 
  79.86 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.79 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Finn(s) 
adjective: 
  Finnish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Finn, Swede, Lapp, Gypsy, Tatar 
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 89%, Greek Orthodox 1%, none 9%, other 1% 
Languages: 
  Finnish 93.5% (official), Swedish 6.3% (official), small Lapp- and
  Russian-speaking minorities
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  2.533 million 
by occupation: 
  public services 30.4%, industry 20.9%, commerce 15.0%, finance,
  insurance, and business services 10.2%, agriculture and forestry 8.6%,
  transport and communications 7.7%, construction 7.2%

@Finland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Finland 
conventional short form: 
  Finland 
local long form: 
  Suomen Tasavalta 
local short form: 
  Suomi 
Digraph: 
  FI
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Helsinki 
Administrative divisions: 
  12 provinces (laanit, singular - laani); Ahvenanmaa, Hame,
  Keski-Suomi, Kuopio, Kymi, Lappi, Mikkeli, Oulu, Pohjois-Karjala,
  Turku ja Pori, Uusimaa, Vaasa
Independence: 
  6 December 1917 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 6 December (1917) 
Constitution: 
  17 July 1919
Legal system: 
  civil law system based on Swedish law; Supreme Court may request
  legislation interpreting or modifying laws; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Martti AHTISAARI (since 1 March 1994); election last held 31
  January - 6 February 1994 (next to be held January 2000); results -
  Martti AHTISAARI 54%, Elisabeth REHN 46%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Esko AHO (since 26 April 1991); Deputy Prime Minister
  Pertti SALOLAINEN (since at least January 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of State (Valtioneuvosto); appointed by the president,
  responsible to Parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Eduskunta): 
  elections last held 17 March 1991 (next to be held March 1995);
  results - Center Party 24.8%, Social Democratic Party 22.1%, National
  Coalition (Conservative) Party 19.3%, Leftist Alliance (Communist)
  10.1%, Green League 6.8%, Swedish People's Party 5.5%, Rural 4.8%,
  Finnish Christian League 3.1%, Liberal People's Party 0.8%; seats -
  (200 total) Center Party 55, Social Democratic Party 48, National
  Coalition (Conservative) Party 40, Leftist Alliance (Communist) 19,
  Swedish People's Party 12, Green League 10, Finnish Christian League
  8, Rural 7, Liberal People's Party 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Korkein Oikeus) 
Political parties and leaders: 
government coalition: 
  Center Party, Esko AHO; National Coalition (conservative) Party, Perti
  SALOLAINEN; Swedish People's Party, (Johan) Ole NORRBACK; Finnish
  Christian League, Toimi KANKAANNIEMI
other parties: 
  Social Democratic Party, Paavo LIPPONEN, acting chairman; Leftist
  Alliance (Communist) People's Democratic League and Democratic
  Alternative, Claes ANDERSON; Green League, Pekka SAURI; Rural Party,
  Tina MAKELA; Liberal People's Party, Kalle MAATTA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Finnish Communist Party-Unity, Yrjo HAKANEN; Constitutional Rightist
  Party; Finnish Pensioners Party; Communist Workers Party, Timo
  LAHDENMAKI
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN,
  COCOM (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA (associate), FAO, G-9,
  GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS,
  MTCR, NAM (guest), NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, PCA, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMOGIP,
  UNPROFOR, UNTSO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jukka VALTASAARI 
chancery: 
  3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016 
telephone: 
  (202) 363-2430 
FAX: 
  (202) 363-8233 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John H. KELLY 
embassy: 
  Itainen Puistotie 14A, SF-00140, Helsinki 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09723 
telephone: 
  [358] (0) 171931 
FAX: 
  [358] (0) 174681 
Flag: 
  white with a blue cross that extends to the edges of the flag; the
  vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side in the style
  of the DANNEBROG (Danish flag)

@Finland, Economy

Overview: 
  Finland has a highly industrialized, largely free market economy, with
  per capita output two-thirds of the US figure. Its key economic sector
  is manufacturing - principally the wood, metals, and engineering
  industries. Trade is important, with the export of goods representing
  about 30% of GDP. Except for timber and several minerals, Finland
  depends on imports of raw materials, energy, and some components for
  manufactured goods. Because of the climate, agricultural development
  is limited to maintaining self-sufficiency in basic products. The
  economy, which experienced an average of 4.9% annual growth between
  1987 and 1989, sank into deep recession in 1991 as growth contracted
  by 6.5%. The recession - which continued in 1992 with growth
  contracting by 4.1% - has been caused by economic overheating,
  depressed foreign markets, and the dismantling of the barter system
  between Finland and the former Soviet Union under which Soviet oil and
  gas had been exchanged for Finnish manufactured goods. The Finnish
  Government has proposed efforts to increase industrial competitiveness
  and efficiency by an increase in exports to Western markets, cuts in
  public expenditures, partial privatization of state enterprises, and
  changes in monetary policy. In June 1991 Helsinki had tied the markka
  to the European Union's (EU) European Currency Unit (ECU) to promote
  stability. Ongoing speculation resulting from a lack of confidence in
  the government's policies forced Helsinki to devalue the markka by
  about 12% in November 1991 and to indefinitely break the link in
  September 1992. The devaluations have boosted the competitiveness of
  Finnish exports to the extent the recession bottomed out in 1993 with
  renewed economic growth expected in 1994. Unemployment probably will
  remain a serious problem during the next few years, with the majority
  of Finnish firms facing a weak domestic market and the troubled German
  and Swedish export markets. Declining revenues, increased transfer
  payments, and extensive funding to bail out the banking system pushed
  the central government's budget deficit to nearly 13% in 1993.
  Helsinki continues to harmonize its economic policies with those of
  the EU during Finland's current EU membership bid. In early 1995,
  Finland is expected to join the European Union (formerly the European
  Community), thus broadening European economic unity.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $81.1 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -2.6% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $16,100 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.1% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  22% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $26.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $40.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $23.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  timber, paper and pulp, ships, machinery, clothing and footwear
partners: 
  EC 53.2% (Germany 15.6%, UK 10.7%), EFTA 19.5% (Sweden 12.8%), US
  5.9%, Japan 1.3%, Russia 2.8% (1992)
Imports: 
  $18 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals, transport
  equipment, iron and steel, machinery, textile yarn and fabrics, fodder
  grains
partners: 
  EC 47.2% (Germany 16.9%, UK 8.7%), EFTA 19.0% (Sweden 11.7%), US 6.1%,
  Japan 5.5%, Russia 7.1% (1992)
External debt: 
  $30 billion (December 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7.6% (1992 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  13,500,000 kW
production: 
  55.3 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  11,050 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  metal products, shipbuilding, forestry and wood processing (pulp,
  paper), copper refining, foodstuffs, chemicals, textiles, clothing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 5% of GDP (including forestry); livestock production,
  especially dairy cattle, predominates; forestry is an important export
  earner and a secondary occupation for the rural population; main crops
  - cereals, sugar beets, potatoes; 85% self-sufficient, but short of
  foodgrains and fodder grains; annual fish catch about 160,000 metric
  tons
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89),  $2.7 billion 
Currency: 
  1 markka (FMk) or Finmark = 100 pennia
Exchange rates: 
  markkaa (FMk) per US$1 - 5.6920 (January 1994), 5.7123 (1993), 4.4794
  (1992), 4.0440 (1991), 3.8235 (1990), 4.2912 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Finland, Communications

Railroads: 
  5,924 km total; Finnish State Railways (VR) operate a total of 5,863
  km 1,524-mm gauge, of which 480 km are multiple track and 1,710 km are
  electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  76,631 km (1991)
paved: 
  bituminous concrete, bituminous treated soil 46,745 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 29,886 km 
Inland waterways: 
  6,675 km total (including Saimaa Canal); 3,700 km suitable for
  steamers
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 580 km 
Ports: 
  Helsinki, Oulu, Pori, Rauma, Turku
Merchant marine: 
  93 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,040,905 GRT/1,143,276 DWT,
  bulk 7, cargo 20, chemical tanker 5, liquefied gas 3, oil tanker 15,
  passenger 3, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 30,
  short-sea passenger 9 
Airports: 
total: 
  160 
usable: 
  157 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  66 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  26 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  20 
Telecommunications: 
  good service from cable and microwave radio relay network; 3,140,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 6 AM, 105 FM, 235 TV; 1 submarine
  cable; INTELSAT satellite transmission service via Swedish earth
  station and a receive-only INTELSAT earth station near Helsinki

@Finland, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Frontier Guard (including Coast Guard)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,323,322; fit for military service 1,089,300; reach
  military age (17) annually 33,594 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.6 billion, about 1.5% of GDP (1993)


@France, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Spain and
  Germany
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  547,030 sq km 
land area: 
  545,630 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Colorado
note: 
  includes Corsica and the rest of metropolitan France, but excludes the
  overseas administrative divisions
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,892.4 km, Andorra 60 km, Belgium 620 km, Germany 451 km, Italy
  488 km, Luxembourg 73 km, Monaco 4.4 km, Spain 623 km, Switzerland 573
  km 
Coastline: 
  3,427 km (mainland 2,783 km, Corsica 644 km)
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12-24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Madagascar claims Bassas da India, Europa Island, Glorioso Islands,
  Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island; Comoros claims Mayotte;
  Mauritius claims Tromelin Island; Seychelles claims Tromelin Island;
  Suriname claims part of French Guiana; Mexico claims Clipperton
  Island; territorial claim in Antarctica (Adelie Land); Saint Pierre
  and Miquelon is focus of maritime boundary dispute between Canada and
  France
Climate: 
  generally cool winters and mild summers, but mild winters and hot
  summers along the Mediterranean
Terrain: 
  mostly flat plains or gently rolling hills in north and west;
  remainder is mountainous, especially Pyrenees in south, Alps in east
Natural resources: 
  coal, iron ore, bauxite, fish, timber, zinc, potash 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  32% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  23% 
forest and woodland: 
  27% 
other: 
  16% 
Irrigated land: 
  11,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  some forest damage from acid rain; air pollution from industrial and
  vehicle emissions; water pollution from urban wastes, agricultural
  runoff
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  largest West European nation; occasional warm tropical wind known as
  mistral

@France, People

Population: 
  57,840,445 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.47% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.13 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.3 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.86 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.19 years 
male: 
  74.27 years 
female: 
  82.3 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.8 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Frenchman(men), Frenchwoman(women) 
adjective: 
  French 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Celtic and Latin with Teutonic, Slavic, North African, Indochinese,
  Basque minorities 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 90%, Protestant 2%, Jewish 1%, Muslim (North African
  workers) 1%, unaffiliated 6% 
Languages: 
  French 100%, rapidly declining regional dialects and languages
  (Provencal, Breton, Alsatian, Corsican, Catalan, Basque, Flemish)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  24.17 million 
by occupation: 
  services 61.5%, industry 31.3%, agriculture 7.2% (1987)

@France, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  French Republic 
conventional short form: 
  France 
local long form: 
  Republique Francaise 
local short form: 
  France 
Digraph: 
  FR
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Paris 
Administrative divisions: 
  22 regions (regions, singular - region); Alsace, Aquitaine, Auvergne,
  Basse-Normandie, Bourgogne, Bretagne, Centre, Champagne-Ardenne,
  Corse, Franche-Comte, Haute-Normandie, Ile-de-France,
  Languedoc-Roussillon, Limousin, Lorraine, Midi-Pyrenees,
  Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Pays de la Loire, Picardie, Poitou-Charentes,
  Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur, Rhone-Alpes
note: 
  the 22 regions are subdivided into 96 departments; see separate
  entries for the overseas departments (French Guiana, Guadeloupe,
  Martinique, Reunion) and the territorial collectivities (Mayotte,
  Saint Pierre and Miquelon)
Dependent areas: 
  Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French Polynesia,
  French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova
  Island, New Caledonia, Tromelin Island, Wallis and Futuna 
note: 
  the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica 
Independence: 
  486 (unified by Clovis)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958, amended concerning election of president in 1962,
  amended to comply with provisions of EC Maastricht Treaty in 1992;
  amended to tighten immigration laws 1993
Legal system: 
  civil law system with indigenous concepts; review of administrative
  but not legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981); election last held
  8 May 1988 (next to be held by May 1995); results - Second Ballot
  Francois MITTERRAND 54%, Jacques CHIRAC 46%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Edouard BALLADUR (since 29 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on the suggestion of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Parlement)
Senate (Senat): 
  elections last held 27 September 1992 (next to be held September 1995
  - nine-year term, elected by thirds every three years); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (321 total; 296 metropolitan
  France, 13 for overseas departments and territories, and 12 for French
  nationals abroad) RPR 91, UDF 142 (UREI 51, UC 68, RDE 23), PS 66, PCF
  16, independents 2, other 4
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held NA 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (577 total) RPR 247,
  UDF 213, PS 67, PCF 24, independents 26
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court (Cour Constitutionnelle) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Rally for the Republic (RPR), Jacques CHIRAC; Union for French
  Democracy (UDF, federation of UREI, UC, RDE), Valery Giscard
  d'ESTAING; Republican Party (PR), Gerard LONGUET; Center for Social
  Democrats (CDS), Pierre MEHAIGNERIE; Radical (RAD), Yves GALLAND;
  Socialist Party (PS), Henri EMMAMUELLI, interim party leader; Left
  Radical Movement (MRG), Jean-Francois HORY; Communist Party (PCF),
  Robert HUE; National Front (FN), Jean-Marie LE PEN; Union of
  Republican and Independents (UREI); Centrist Union (UC); Democratic
  Assembly (RDE); The Greens, Antoine WAECHTER, Jean-Louis VIDAL, Guy
  CAMBOT; Generation Ecology (GE), Brice LALONDE
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Communist-controlled labor union (Confederation Generale du Travail -
  CGT) nearly 2.4 million members (claimed); Socialist-leaning labor
  union (Confederation Francaise Democratique du Travail or CFDT) about
  800,000 members (est.); independent labor union (Force Ouvriere) 1
  million members (est.); independent white-collar union (Confederation
  Generale des Cadres) 340,000 members (claimed); National Council of
  French Employers (Conseil National du Patronat Francais - CNPF or
  Patronat)
Member of: 
  ACCT, AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CCC, CDB
  (non-regional), CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECA (associate), ECE,
  ECLAC, EIB, ESA, ESCAP, FAO, FZ, GATT, G-5, G-7, G-10, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC,
  NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, SPC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNRWA, UN
  Security Council, UNTAC, UN Trusteeship Council, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jacques ANDREANI 
chancery: 
  4101 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 944-6000 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Pamela C. HARRIMAN 
embassy: 
  2 Avenue Gabriel, 75382 Paris Cedex 08 
mailing address: 
  Unit 21551, Paris; APO AE 09777 
telephone: 
  [33] (1) 4296-12-02 or 42-61-80-75 
FAX: 
  [33] (1) 4266-9783 
consulate(s) general: 
  Bordeaux, Marseille, Strasbourg 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), white, and red; known
  as the French Tricouleur (Tricolor); the design and colors are similar
  to a number of other flags, including those of Belgium, Chad, Ireland,
  Cote d'Ivoire, and Luxembourg; the official flag for all French
  dependent areas

@France, Economy

Overview: 
  One of the world's most developed economies, France has substantial
  agricultural resources and a highly diversified modern industrial
  sector. Large tracts of fertile land, the application of modern
  technology, and subsidies have combined to make it the leading
  agricultural producer in Western Europe. Largely self-sufficient in
  agricultural products, France is a major exporter of wheat and dairy
  products. The industrial sector generates about one-quarter of GDP,
  and the growing services sector has become crucial to the economy.
  Although French GDP contracted by 0.7% in 1993, the economy showed
  signs of life by yearend. GDP growth, however, will remain sluggish in
  1994 - perhaps reaching only 1.0%. Rapidly increasing unemployment
  will still pose a major problem for the government. Paris remains
  committed to maintaining the franc-deutsche mark parity, which has
  kept French interest rates high despite France's low inflation.
  Although the pace of economic integration within the European
  Community has slowed down, integration presumably will remain a major
  force shaping the fortunes of the various economic sectors.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.05 trillion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.7% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $18,200 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.1% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  12.2% (May 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $220.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $249.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $47 billion (1993
  budget)
Exports: 
  $270.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment, chemicals, foodstuffs,
  agricultural products, iron and steel products, textiles and clothing
partners: 
  Germany 18.6%, Italy 11.0%, Spain 11.0%, Belgium-Luxembourg 9.1%, UK
  8.8%, Netherlands 7.9%, US 6.4%, Japan 2.0%, former USSR 0.7% (1991
  est.)
Imports: 
  $250.2 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  crude oil, machinery and equipment, agricultural products, chemicals,
  iron and steel products
partners: 
  Germany 17.8%, Italy 10.9%, US 9.5%, Netherlands 8.9%, Spain 8.8%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 8.5%, UK 7.5%, Japan 4.1%, former USSR 1.3% (1991
  est.)
External debt: 
  $300 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -4.3% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  110 million kW
production: 
  426 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  7,430 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  steel, machinery, chemicals, automobiles, metallurgy, aircraft,
  electronics, mining, textiles, food processing, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4% of GDP (including fishing and forestry); one of the
  world's top five wheat producers; other principal products - beef,
  dairy products, cereals, sugar beets, potatoes, wine grapes;
  self-sufficient for most temperate-zone foods; shortages include fats
  and oils and tropical produce, but overall net exporter of farm
  products; fish catch of 850,000 metric tons ranks among world's top 20
  countries and is all used domestically
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $75.1 billion 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@France, Communications

Railroads: 
  French National Railways (SNCF) operates 34,322 km 1,435-mm standard
  gauge; 12,434 km electrified, 15,132 km double or multiple track; 99
  km of various gauges (1,000-mm), privately owned and operated
Highways: 
total: 
  1,510,750 km 
paved: 
  747,750 km (including 7,450 km of controlled access divided highway)
unpaved: 
  763,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  14,932 km; 6,969 km heavily traveled
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 3,059 km; petroleum products 4,487 km; natural gas 24,746 km
Ports: 
  coastal - Bordeaux, Boulogne, Brest, Cherbourg, Dunkerque,
  Fos-Sur-Mer, Le Havre, Marseille, Nantes, Sete, Toulon; inland - Rouen
Merchant marine: 
  124 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,226,175 GRT/5,109,375 DWT,
  bulk 9, cargo 10, chemical tanker 8, container 21, liquefied gas 6,
  multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 37, passenger 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 21, short-sea passenger 7, specialized tanker 3
note: 
  France also maintains a captive register for French-owned ships in the
  Kerguelen Islands (French Southern and Antarctic Lands) and French
  Polynesia
Airports: 
total: 
  472 
usable: 
  461 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  258 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  37 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  136 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed; extensive cable and microwave radio relay networks;
  large-scale introduction of optical-fiber systems; satellite systems
  for domestic traffic; 39,200,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 41
  AM, 800 (mostly repeaters) FM, 846 (mostly repeaters) TV; 24 submarine
  coaxial cables; 2 INTELSAT earth stations (with total of 5 antennas -
  2 for the Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 3 for the Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT); HF radio communications with more than 20 countries;
  INMARSAT service; EUTELSAT TV service

@France, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Naval Air), Air Force, National Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 14,717,461; fit for military service 12,265,874; reach
  military age (18) annually 376,485 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $33.0 billion, 3.3% of GDP (1993)


@French Guiana

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas department of France) 

@French Guiana, Geography

Location: 
  Northern South America, bordering on the North Atlantic Ocean between
  Suriname and Brazil
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  91,000 sq km 
land area: 
  89,150 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Indiana
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,183 km, Brazil 673 km, Suriname 510 km 
Coastline: 
  378 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Suriname claims area between Riviere Litani and Riviere Marouini (both
  headwaters of the Lawa)
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  low-lying coastal plains rising to hills and small mountains
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, timber, gold (widely scattered), cinnabar, kaolin, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  82% 
other: 
  18% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  mostly an unsettled wilderness

@French Guiana, People

Population: 
  139,299 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  4.27% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.83 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.67 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  21.54 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  15.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.2 years 
male: 
  71.93 years 
female: 
  78.63 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.5 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  French Guianese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  French Guianese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black or mulatto 66%, Caucasian 12%, East Indian, Chinese, Amerindian
  12%, other 10% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  French 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1982)
total population: 
  82% 
male: 
  81% 
female: 
  83% 
Labor force: 
  23,265 
by occupation: 
  services, government, and commerce 60.6%, industry 21.2%, agriculture
  18.2% (1980)
Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Department of Guiana 
conventional short form: 
  French Guiana 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Guyane 
Digraph: 
  FG
Type: 
  overseas department of France 
Capital: 
  Cayenne 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Independence: 
  none (overseas department of France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French legal system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  Prefect Jean-Francois CORDET (since NA 1992); President of the General
  Council Elie CASTOR (since NA); President of the Regional Council
  Antoine KARAM (22 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral General Council and a unicameral Regional Council
General Council: 
  elections last held 25 September and 8 October 1988 (next to be held
  NA); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (19 total) PSG 12,
  URC 7
Regional Council: 
  elections last held 22 March 1992 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (31 total) PSG 16
French Senate: 
  elections last held 24 September 1989 (next to be held September
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) PSG 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held NA 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (2 total) RPR 1,
  independent 1
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeals (highest local court based in Martinique with
  jurisdiction over Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guiana)
Political parties and leaders: 
  Guianese Socialist Party (PSG), Elie CASTRO; Conservative Union for
  the Republic (UPR), Leon BERTRAND; Rally for the Center Right (URC);
  Rally for the Republic (RPR); Guyana Democratic Front (FDG), Georges
  OTHILY; Walwari Committee, Christine TAUBIRA-DELANON
Member of: 
  FZ, WCL 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas department of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@French Guiana, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is tied closely to that of France through subsidies and
  imports. Besides the French space center at Kourou, fishing and
  forestry are the most important economic activities, with exports of
  fish and fish products (mostly shrimp) accounting for more than 60% of
  total revenue in 1992. The large reserves of tropical hardwoods, not
  fully exploited, support an expanding sawmill industry that provides
  sawn logs for export. Cultivation of crops - rice, cassava, bananas,
  and sugar cane - is limited to the coastal area, where the population
  is largely concentrated. French Guiana is heavily dependent on imports
  of food and energy. Unemployment is a serious problem, particularly
  among younger workers.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $421 million (1986)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $4,390 (1986)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.1% (1987)
Unemployment rate: 
  13% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $735 million 
expenditures: 
  $735 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1987)
Exports: 
  $59 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  shrimp, timber, rum, rosewood essence
partners: 
  France 52%, Spain 15%, US 5% (1992)
Imports: 
  $1.5 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  food (grains, processed meat), other consumer goods, producer goods,
  petroleum
partners: 
  France 77%, Germany 11%, US 5% (1992)
External debt: 
  $1.2 billion (1988)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  92,000 kW
production: 
  185 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,450 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  construction, shrimp processing, forestry products, rum, gold mining
Agriculture: 
  some vegetables for local consumption; rice, corn, manioc, cocoa,
  bananas, sugar; livestock - cattle, pigs, poultry
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $1.51 billion 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@French Guiana, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  680 km 
paved: 
  510 km 
unpaved: 
  improved, unimproved earth 170 km 
Inland waterways: 
  460 km, navigable by small oceangoing vessels and river and coastal
  steamers; 3,300 km navigable by native craft
Ports: 
  Cayenne
Airports: 
total: 
  10 
usable: 
  10 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  fair open-wire and microwave radio relay system; 18,100 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 5 AM, 7 FM, 9 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@French Guiana, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  French Forces, Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 40,506; fit for military service 26,394 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@French Polynesia

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas territory of France) 

@French Polynesia, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia halfway between Australia and South America
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  3,941 sq km 
land area: 
  3,660 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than one-third the size of Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  2,525 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, but moderate
Terrain: 
  mixture of rugged high islands and low islands with reefs
Natural resources: 
  timber, fish, cobalt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  19% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  31% 
other: 
  44% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  occasional cyclonic storms in January
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  includes five archipelagoes; Makatea in French Polynesia is one of the
  three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean - the others
  are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and Nauru

@French Polynesia, People

Population: 
  215,129 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.25% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  27.75 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.27 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  14.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.54 years 
male: 
  68.14 years 
female: 
  73.06 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.31 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  French Polynesian(s) 
adjective: 
  French Polynesian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian 78%, Chinese 12%, local French 6%, metropolitan French 4% 
Religions: 
  Protestant 54%, Roman Catholic 30%, other 16% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Tahitian (official)
Literacy: 
  age 14 and over but definition of literacy not available (1977)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  76,630 employed (1988)

@French Polynesia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of French Polynesia 
conventional short form: 
  French Polynesia 
local long form: 
  Territoire de la Polynesie Francaise 
local short form: 
  Polynesie Francaise 
Digraph: 
  FP
Type: 
  overseas territory of France since 1946
Capital: 
  Papeete 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas territory of France); there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are 5 archipelagic divisions named Archipel des Marquises, Archipel
  des Tuamotu, Archipel des Tubuai, Iles du Vent, and Iles Sous-le-Vent
note: 
  Clipperton Island is administered by France from French Polynesia
Independence: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  based on French system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981); High Commissioner
  of the Republic Michel JAU (since NA February 1992) 
head of government: 
  President of the Territorial Government of French Polynesia Gaston
  FLOSSE (since 10 May 1991); Deputy to the French Assembly and
  President of the Territorial Assembly Jean JUVENTIN (since NA November
  1992); Territorial Vice President and Minister of Health Michel
  BUILLARD (since 12 September 1991)
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; president submits a list of members of the
  Assembly for approval by them to serve as ministers
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Territorial Assembly: 
  elections last held 17 March 1991 (next to be held March 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (41 total) People's
  Rally for the Republic (Gaullist) 18, Polynesian Union Party 12, New
  Fatherland Party 7, other 4
French Senate: 
  elections last held 24 September 1989 (next to be held September
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) party
  NA
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held NA March
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (2 total)
  People's Rally for the Republic (Gaullist) 2
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, Court of the First Instance, Court of Administrative
  Law 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's Rally for the Republic (Tahoeraa Huiraatira), Gaston FLOSSE;
  Polynesian Union Party includes Te Tiarama, Alexandre LEONTIEFF, and
  Pupu Here Ai'a Te Nuneao Ia Ora, Jean JUVENTIN; New Fatherland Party
  (Ai'a Api), Emile VERNAUDON; Polynesian Liberation Front (Tavini
  Huiraatira), Oscar TEMARU; Independent Party (Ia Mana Te Nunaa), James
  SALMON; other small parties
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), FZ, ICFTU, SPC, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@French Polynesia, Economy

Overview: 
  Since 1962, when France stationed military personnel in the region,
  French Polynesia has changed from a subsistence economy to one in
  which a high proportion of the work force is either employed by the
  military or supports the tourist industry. Tourism accounts for about
  20% of GDP and is a primary source of hard currency earnings.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $1.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $7,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  -0.6% (1991)
Unemployment rate: 
  10% (1990 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $614 million 
expenditures: 
  $957 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988)
Exports: 
  $88.9 million (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: 
  coconut products 79%, mother-of-pearl 14%, vanilla, shark meat
partners: 
  France 54%, US 17%, Japan 17%
Imports: 
  $765 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: 
  fuels, foodstuffs, equipment
partners: 
  France 53%, US 11%, Australia 6%, NZ 5%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  75,000 kW
production: 
  275 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,330 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, pearls, agricultural processing, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  coconut and vanilla plantations; vegetables and fruit; poultry, beef,
  dairy products
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-88), $3.95 billion 
Currency: 
  1 CFP franc (CFPF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per US$1 - 107.63
  (January 1994), 102.96 (1993), 96.24 (1992), 102.57 (1991), 99.00
  (1990), 115.99 (1989); note - linked at the rate of 18.18 to the
  French franc
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@French Polynesia, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  600 km (1982)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Papeete, Bora-bora
Merchant marine: 
  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,127 GRT/6,710 DWT,
  passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated cargo 1 
note: 
  a captive subset of the French register
Airports: 
total: 
  43 
usable: 
  41 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  23 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  12 
Telecommunications: 
  33,200 telephones; 84,000 radio receivers; 26,400 TV sets; broadcast
  stations - 5 AM, 2 FM, 6 TV; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@French Polynesia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  French forces (including Army, Navy, Air Force), Gendarmerie 
Note: 
  defense is responsibility of France


@French Southern and Antarctic Lands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas territory of France) 

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the southern Indian Ocean, about equidistant
  between Africa, Antarctica, and Australia
Map references: 
  Antarctic Region, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  7,781 sq km 
land area: 
  7,781 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of Delaware
note: 
  includes Ile Amsterdam, Ile Saint-Paul, Iles Kerguelen, and Iles
  Crozet; excludes Terre Adelie claim of about 500,000 sq km in
  Antarctica that is not recognized by the US
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,232 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm from Iles Kerguelen only
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Terre Adelie claim in Antarctica is not recognized by the US
Climate: 
  antarctic
Terrain: 
  volcanic
Natural resources: 
  fish, crayfish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  Ile Amsterdam and Ile Saint-Paul are extinct volcanoes
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  remote location in the southern Indian Ocean

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are researchers whose numbers
  vary from 150 in winter (July) to 200 in summer (January)

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
conventional short form: 
  French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
local long form: 
  Territoire des Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises 
local short form: 
  Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises 
Digraph: 
  FS
Type: 
  overseas territory of France since 1955; governed by High
  Administrator Bernard de GOUTTES (since May 1990), who is assisted by
  a 7-member Consultative Council and a 12-member Scientific Council
Capital: 
  none; administered from Paris, France
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas territory of France); there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are 3 districts named Ile Crozet, Iles Kerguelen, and Iles Saint-Paul
  et Amsterdam; excludes Terre Adelie claim in Antarctica that is not
  recognized by the US
Independence: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is limited to servicing meteorological and
  geophysical research stations and French and other fishing fleets. The
  fishing catches landed on Iles Kerguelen by foreign ships are exported
  to France and Reunion.
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $17.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Merchant marine: 
  21 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 441,962 GRT/813,779 DWT, bulk 3,
  cargo 2, chemical tanker 1, liquified gas 2, multifunction large load
  carrier 1, oil tanker 4, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo
  4 
note: 
  a captive subset of the French register
Telecommunications: 
  NA

@French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Gabon, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the Atlantic Ocean at the Equator between
  the Congo and Equatorial Guinea
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  267,670 sq km 
land area: 
  257,670 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Colorado
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,551 km, Cameroon 298 km, Congo 1,903 km, Equatorial Guinea 350
  km 
Coastline: 
  885 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary dispute with Equatorial Guinea because of disputed
  sovereignty over islands in Corisco Bay
Climate: 
  tropical; always hot, humid
Terrain: 
  narrow coastal plain; hilly interior; savanna in east and south
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, manganese, uranium, gold, timber, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  78% 
other: 
  2% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; poaching
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands; signed,
  but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea

@Gabon, People

Population: 
  1,139,006 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.46% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  13.9 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  94.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  54.67 years 
male: 
  51.88 years 
female: 
  57.53 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.97 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Gabonese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Gabonese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Bantu tribes including four major tribal groupings (Fang, Eshira,
  Bapounou, Bateke), Africans and Europeans 100,000, including 27,000
  French
Religions: 
  Christian 55-75%, Muslim less than 1%, animist 
Languages: 
  French (official), Fang, Myene, Bateke, Bapounou/Eschira, Bandjabi 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  61% 
male: 
  74% 
female: 
  48% 
Labor force: 
  120,000 salaried
by occupation: 
  agriculture 65.0%, industry and commerce 30.0%, services 2.5%,
  government 2.5%
note: 
  58% of population of working age (1983)

@Gabon, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Gabonese Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Gabon 
local long form: 
  Republique Gabonaise 
local short form: 
  Gabon 
Digraph: 
  GB
Type: 
  republic; multiparty presidential regime (opposition parties legalized
  1990)
Capital: 
  Libreville 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces; Estuaire, Haut-Ogooue, Moyen-Ogooue, Ngounie, Nyanga,
  Ogooue-Ivindo, Ogooue-Lolo, Ogooue-Maritime, Woleu-Ntem
Independence: 
  17 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Renovation Day, 12 March (1968) (Gabonese Democratic Party
  established)
Constitution: 
  adopted 14 March 1991
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and customary law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court;
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction not accepted
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President El Hadj Omar BONGO (since 2 December 1967); election last
  held on 5 December 1993 (next to be held NA 1998); results - President
  Omar BONGO was reelected with 51% of the vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Casimir OYE-MBA (since 3 May 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister in consultation
  with the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held on 21 and 28 October and 4 November 1990 (next to
  be held by NA); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (120
  total) PDG 62, Morena-Bucherons/RNB 19, PGP 18, National Recovery
  Movement (Morena-Original) 7, APSG 6, USG 4, CRP 1, independents 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Gabonese Democratic Party (PDG, former sole party), Jaques ADIAHENOT,
  Secretary General; National Recovery Movement - Lumberjacks
  (Morena-Bucherons/RNB), Fr. Paul M'BA-ABESSOLE, leader; Gabonese Party
  for Progress (PGP), Pierre-Louis AGONDHO-OKAWE, President; National
  Recovery Movement (Morena-Original), Pierre ZONGUE-NGUEMA, Chairman;
  Association for Socialism in Gabon (APSG), leader NA; Gabonese
  Socialist Union (USG), leader NA; Circle for Renewal and Progress
  (CRP), leader NA; Union for Democracy and Development (UDD), leader
  NA; Rally of Democrats (RD), leader NA; Forces of Change for
  Democratic Union, leader NA
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC, CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS (associate), NAM, OAU,
  OIC, OPEC, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Paul BOUNDOUKOU-LATHA 
chancery: 
  2034 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 797-1000 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Joseph C. WILSON IV 
embassy: 
  Boulevard de la Mer, Libreville 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 4000, Libreville 
telephone: 
  (241) 762003/4, or 743492 
FAX: 
  [241] 745-507 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), yellow, and blue

@Gabon, Economy

Overview: 
  Notwithstanding its serious ongoing economic problems, Gabon enjoys a
  per capita income more than twice that of most nations of sub-Saharan
  Africa. Gabon depended on timber and manganese until oil was
  discovered offshore in the early 1970s. The oil sector now accounts
  for 50% of GNP. Real growth was feeble in 1992 and Gabon continues to
  face weak prices for its timber, manganese, and uranium exports.
  Despite an abundance of natural wealth, and a manageable rate of
  population growth, the economy is hobbled by poor fiscal management.
  In 1992, the fiscal deficit widened to 2.4% of GDP, and Gabon failed
  to settled arrears on its bilateral debt, leading to a cancellation of
  rescheduling agreements with official and private creditors.
  Devaluation of the local currency by 50% in January 1994 could set off
  an inflationary spiral if the government fails to reign in spending
  and grants large wage increases to an already overpaid public sector
  workforce.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $5.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.5% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  0.7% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $272 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $2.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est)
commodities: 
  crude oil 80%, timber 9%, manganese 7%, uranium 2%
partners: 
  France 48%, US 15%, Germany 2%, Japan 2%
Imports: 
  $702 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, chemical products, petroleum products, construction
  materials, manufactures, machinery
partners: 
  France 64%, African countries 7%, US 5%, Japan 3%
External debt: 
  $4.4 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -10% (1988 est.); accounts for 8% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  315,000 kW
production: 
  995 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  920 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  petroleum, food and beverages, lumbering and plywood, textiles, mining
  - manganese, uranium, gold, cement
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 9% of GDP (including fishing and forestry); cash crops -
  cocoa, coffee, palm oil; livestock not developed; importer of food;
  small fishing operations provide a catch of about 20,000 metric tons;
  okoume (a tropical softwood) is the most important timber product
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $68 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-90),
  $2.342 billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $27 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Gabon, Communications

Railroads: 
  649 km 1.437-meter standard-gauge single track (Transgabonese
  Railroad)
Highways: 
total: 
  7,500 km 
paved: 
  560 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone 960 km; earth 5,980 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,600 km perennially navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 270 km; petroleum products 14 km 
Ports: 
  Owendo, Port-Gentil, Libreville
Merchant marine: 
  2 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 18,562 GRT/25,330 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  70 
usable: 
  59 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  22 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate system of cable, radio relay, tropospheric scatter links and
  radiocommunication stations; 15,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 6
  AM, 6 FM, 3 (5 repeaters) TV; satellite earth stations - 3 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT and 12 domestic satellite

@Gabon, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Presidential Guard, National Gendarmerie,
  National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 270,501; fit for military service 136,995; reach
  military age (20) annually 10,107 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $102 million, 3.2% of GDP (1990 est.)


@The Gambia, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean almost completely
  surrounded by Senegal
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  11,300 sq km 
land area: 
  10,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Delaware
Land boundaries: 
  total 740 km, Senegal 740 km 
Coastline: 
  80 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  18 nm
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of boundary with Senegal is indefinite
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler, dry season
  (November to May)
Terrain: 
  flood plain of the Gambia River flanked by some low hills
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  16% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  9% 
forest and woodland: 
  20% 
other: 
  55% 
Irrigated land: 
  120 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; desertification; water-borne diseases prevalent
natural hazards: 
  rainfall has dropped by 30% in the last thirty years
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  almost an enclave of Senegal; smallest country on the continent of
  Africa

@The Gambia, People

Population: 
  959,300 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.08% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  46.39 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  15.64 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  123.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  50.08 years 
male: 
  47.83 years 
female: 
  52.39 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.29 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Gambian(s) 
adjective: 
  Gambian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 99% (Mandinka 42%, Fula 18%, Wolof 16%, Jola 10%, Serahuli 9%,
  other 4%), non-Gambian 1% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 90%, Christian 9%, indigenous beliefs 1% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, other indigenous
  vernaculars
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  27% 
male: 
  39% 
female: 
  16% 
Labor force: 
  400,000 (1986 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 75.0%, industry, commerce, and services 18.9%, government
  6.1%
note: 
  55% population of working age (1983)

@The Gambia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of The Gambia 
conventional short form: 
  The Gambia 
Digraph: 
  GA
Type: 
  republic under multiparty democratic rule
Capital: 
  Banjul 
Administrative divisions: 
  5 divisions and 1 city*; Banjul*, Lower River, MacCarthy Island, North
  Bank, Upper River, Western
Independence: 
  18 February 1965 (from UK; The Gambia and Senegal signed an agreement
  on 12 December 1981 that called for the creation of a loose
  confederation to be known as Senegambia, but the agreement was
  dissolved on 30 September 1989)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 18 February (1965) 
Constitution: 
  24 April 1970
Legal system: 
  based on a composite of English common law, Koranic law, and customary
  law; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Alhaji Sir Dawda Kairaba JAWARA (since 24 April 1970); Vice
  President Saihou SABALLY (since NA); election last held on 29 April
  1992 (next to be held April 1997); results - Sir Dawda JAWARA (PPP)
  58.5%, Sherif Mustapha DIBBA (NCP) 22.2%, Assan Musa CAMARA (GPP) 8.0%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from members of the House of
  Representatives
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held on 29 April 1992 (next to be held April 1997);
  results - PPP 58.1%, seats - (43 total, 36 elected) PPP 30, NCP 6
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's Progressive Party (PPP), Dawda K. JAWARA, secretary general;
  National Convention Party (NCP), Sheriff DIBBA; Gambian People's Party
  (GPP), Hassan Musa CAMARA; United Party (UP), leader NA; People's
  Democratic Organization of Independence and Socialism (PDOIS), leader
  NA; People's Democratic Party (PDP), Jabel SALLAH
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL,
  IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ousman A. SALLAH 
chancery: 
  Suite 1000, 1155 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 785-1399, 1379, or 1425 
FAX: 
  (202) 785-1430 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Arlene RENDER 
embassy: 
  Fajara, Kairaba Avenue, Banjul 
mailing address: 
  P. M. B. No. 19, Banjul 
telephone: 
  [220] 92856 or 92858, 91970, 91971 
FAX: 
  (220) 92475 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue with white edges, and
  green

@The Gambia, Economy

Overview: 
  The Gambia has no important mineral or other natural resources and has
  a limited agricultural base. It is one of the world's poorest
  countries with a per capita income of roughly $800. About 75% of the
  population is engaged in crop production and livestock raising, which
  contribute 30% to GDP. Small-scale manufacturing activity - processing
  peanuts, fish, and hides - accounts for less than 10% of GDP. A
  sustained structural adjustment program, including a liberalized trade
  policy, has fostered a respectable 4% rate of growth in recent years.
  Re-export trade constitutes one-third of economic activity; however,
  border closures associated with Senegal's monetary crisis in late 1993
  led to a 50% decline in re-export trade, reducing government revenues
  in turn. Devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994 has made
  Senegalese goods more competitive, and is likely to prompt a
  relaxation of Senegalese controls, paving the way for a comeback in
  re-exports.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $740 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.5% (FY92 est)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5% (FY 92 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $94 million 
expenditures: 
  $80 million, including capital expenditures of $25 million (FY91 est.)
Exports: 
  $164 million (f.o.b., FY92 est.)
commodities: 
  peanuts and peanut products, fish, cotton lint, palm kernels
partners: 
  Japan 60%, Europe 29%, Africa 5%, US 1%, other 5% (1989)
Imports: 
  $214 million (f.o.b., FY92 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, manufactures, raw materials, fuel, machinery and transport
  equipment
partners: 
  Europe 57%, Asia 25%, USSR and Eastern Europe 9%, US 6%, other 3%
  (1989)
External debt: 
  $336 million (December 1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.7% (year NA); accounts for 5.8% of GDP (FY90)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  30,000 kW
production: 
  65 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  75 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  peanut processing, tourism, beverages, agricultural machinery
  assembly, woodworking, metalworking, clothing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 30% of GDP and employs about 75% of the population;
  imports one-third of food requirements; major export crop is peanuts;
  other principal crops - millet, sorghum, rice, corn, cassava, palm
  kernels; livestock - cattle, sheep, goats; forestry and fishing
  resources not fully exploited
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $93 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $535
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $39 million 
Currency: 
  1 dalasi (D) = 100 butut
Exchange rates: 
  dalasi (D) per US$1 - 9.440 (November 1993), 8.888 (1992), 8.803
  (1991), 7.883 (1990), 7.5846 (1989), 6.7086 (1988)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@The Gambia, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  3,083 km 
paved: 
  431 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 501 km; unimproved earth 2,151 km 
Inland waterways: 
  400 km
Ports: 
  Banjul
Merchant marine: 
  1 bulk ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,194 GRT/19,394 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate network of radio relay and wire; 3,500 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 3 AM, 2 FM; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@The Gambia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, National Gendarmerie, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 207,754; fit for military service 105,100 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Gaza Strip

Header
Note: 
  The war between Israel and Egypt, Syria, and Jordan in June 1967 ended
  with Israel in control of the West Bank, East Jerusalem, the Gaza
  Strip, the Sinai Peninsula, and the Golan Heights. Israel withdrew
  from the Sinai Peninsula pursuant to a 1979 peace treaty with Egypt.
  The Israeli-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
  Arrangements ("the DOP"), signed in Washington on 13 September 1993,
  provides for a transitional period not exceeding five years of
  Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip and the West
  Bank. Under the DOP, final status negotiations are to begin no later
  than the beginning of the third year of the transitional period.

@Gaza Strip, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, bordering the eastern Mediterranean Sea, between Egypt
  and Israel
Map references: 
  Middle East 
Area: 
total area: 
  360 sq km 
land area: 
  360 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 62 km, Egypt 11 km, Israel 51 km 
Coastline: 
  40 km 
Maritime claims: 
  Israeli occupied with status to be determined
International disputes: 
  West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli occupied with interim status
  subject to Israeli/Palestinian negotiations - final status to be
  determined
Climate: 
  temperate, mild winters, dry and warm to hot summers
Terrain: 
  flat to rolling, sand- and dune-covered coastal plain
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  13% 
permanent crops: 
  32% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  55% 
Irrigated land: 
  200 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  there are 24 Jewish settlements and civilian land use sites in the
  Gaza Strip (April 1994)

@Gaza Strip, People

Population: 
  731,296 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  in addition, there are 4,500 Jewish settlers in the Gaza Strip (1994
  est.)
Population growth rate: 
  3.53% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.01 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.45 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -4.29 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  36.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.78 years 
male: 
  66.47 years 
female: 
  69.16 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  7.39 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  NA 
adjective: 
  NA 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Palestinian Arab and other 99.8%, Jewish 0.2% 
Religions: 
  Muslim (predominantly Sunni) 99%, Christian 0.7%, Jewish 0.3% 
Languages: 
  Arabic, Hebrew (spoken by Israeli settlers), English (widely
  understood)
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  construction 33.4%, agriculture 20.0%, commerce, restaurants, and
  hotels 14.9%, industry 10.0%, other services 21.7% (1991)
note: 
  excluding Jewish settlers

@Gaza Strip, Government

Note: 
  Under the Israeli-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
  Self-Government Arragements ("the DOP"), Israel agreed to transfer
  certain powers and responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority, and
  subsequently to an elected Palestinian Council, as part of interim
  self-governing arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A
  transfer of powers and responsibilities for the Gaza Strip and Jericho
  has taken place pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4 May 1994 Cairo Agreement
  on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area. The DOP provides that Israel
  will retain responsibility during the transitional period for external
  security and for internal security and public order of settlements and
  Israelis. Final status is to be determined through direct negotiations
  within five years.
Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Gaza Strip 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Qita Ghazzah 
Digraph: 
  GZ

@Gaza Strip, Economy

Overview: 
  In 1991 roughly 40% of Gaza Strip workers were employed across the
  border by Israeli industrial, construction, and agricultural
  enterprises, with worker remittances accounting for about one-third of
  GNP. The construction, agricultural, and industrial sectors account
  for about 18%, 16%, and 12% of GNP, respectively. Gaza depends upon
  Israel for nearly 90% of its external trade. Aggravating the impact of
  Israeli military administration, unrest in the territory since 1988
  (intifadah) has raised unemployment and lowered the standard of living
  of Gazans. The Persian Gulf crisis and its aftershocks also have dealt
  blows to Gaza since August 1990. Worker remittances from the Gulf
  states have dropped, unemployment has increased, and exports have
  fallen. The withdrawal of Israel from the Gaza Strip in May 1994
  brings a new set of adjustment problems.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $840 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,275 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  20% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $33.6 million 
expenditures: 
  $34.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY90)
Exports: 
  $75 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  citrus
partners: 
  Israel, Egypt
Imports: 
  $370 million (c.i.f., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  food, consumer goods, construction materials
partners: 
  Israel, Egypt
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 11% (1991 est.); accounts for about 12% of GNP
Electricity: 
  power supplied by Israel
Industries: 
  generally small family businesses that produce textiles, soap,
  olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs; the Israelis have
  established some small-scale modern industries in an industrial center
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 16% of GNP; olives, citrus and other fruits,
  vegetables, beef, dairy products
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot
Exchange rates: 
  new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1 - 2.9760 (February 1994), 2.8301
  (1993), 2.4591 (1992), 2.2791 (1991), 2.0162 (1990), 1.9164 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

@Gaza Strip, Communications

Railroads: 
  one line, abandoned and in disrepair, some trackage remains
Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
note: 
  small, poorly developed road network
Ports: 
  facilities for small boats to service the city of Gaza
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - no AM, no FM, no TV

@Gaza Strip, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  NA
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Georgia

Note: 
  Georgia is currently besieged by interethnic strife in its Abkhazian
  and South Ossetian enclaves.

@Georgia, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Asia, bordering the Black Sea, between Turkey and Russia
Map references: 
  Africa, Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - European States,
  Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  69,700 sq km 
land area: 
  69,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than South Carolina
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,461 km, Armenia 164 km, Azerbaijan 322 km, Russia 723 km,
  Turkey 252 km 
Coastline: 
  310 km 
Maritime claims: 
note: 
  12 nm in 1973 USSR-Turkish Protocol concerning the sea boundary
  between the two states in the Black Sea; Georgia claims the coastline
  along the Black Sea as its international waters, although it cannot
  control this area and the Russian navy and commercial ships transit
  freely
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  warm and pleasant; Mediterranean-like on Black Sea coast
Terrain: 
  largely mountainous with Great Caucasus Mountains in the north and
  Lesser Caucasus Mountains in the south; Kolkhida Lowland opens to the
  Black Sea in the west; Mtkvari River Basin in the east; good soils in
  river valley flood plains, foothills of Kolkhida Lowland
Natural resources: 
  forest lands, hydropower, manganese deposits, iron ores, copper, minor
  coal and oil deposits; coastal climate and soils allow for important
  tea and citrus growth 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  4,660 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution, particularly in Rust'avi; heavy pollution of Mtkvari
  River and the Black Sea; inadequate supplies of safe drinking water;
  soil pollution from toxic chemicals
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Georgia, People

Population: 
  5,681,025 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.81% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.11 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.69 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  23.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.84 years 
male: 
  69.16 years 
female: 
  76.7 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.18 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Georgian(s) 
adjective: 
  Georgian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Georgian 70.1%, Armenian 8.1%, Russian 6.3%, Azeri 5.7%, Ossetian 3%,
  Abkhaz 1.8%, other 5% 
Religions: 
  Georgian Orthodox 65%, Russian Orthodox 10%, Muslim 11%, Armenian
  Orthodox 8%, unknown 6% 
Languages: 
  Armenian 7%, Azeri 6%, Georgian 71% (official), Russian 9%, other 7% 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  2.763 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 31%, agriculture and forestry 25%, other 44%
  (1990)

@Georgia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Georgia 
conventional short form: 
  Georgia 
local long form: 
  Sak'art'velos Respublika 
local short form: 
  Sak'art'velo 
former: 
  Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  GG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  T'bilisi 
Administrative divisions: 
  2 autonomous republics (avtomnoy respubliki, singular - avtom
  respublika); Abkhazia (Sokhumi), Ajaria (Bat'umi)
note: 
  the administrative centers of the autonomous republics are included in
  parentheses; there are no oblasts - the rayons around T'bilisi are
  under direct republic jurisdiction
Independence: 
  9 April 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 9 April (1991) 
Constitution: 
  adopted NA February 1921; currently amending constitution for
  Parliamentary and popular review by late 1995
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Chairman of Parliament Eduard Amvrosiyevich SHEVARDNADZE (since 10
  March 1992); election last held 11 October 1992 (next to be held NA
  1995); results - Eduard SHEVARDNADZE 95%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Otar PATSATSIA (since September 1993); Deputy Prime
  Ministers Avtandil MARGIANI, Zurab KERVALISHVILI (since NA), Tamaz
  NADARISHVILI (since September 1993), Teimuraz BASILIA (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Georgian Parliament (Supreme Soviet): 
  elections last held 11 October 1992 (next to be held NA 1995); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (225 total) number of seats by
  party NA; note - representatives of 26 parties elected; Peace Bloc,
  October 11, Unity, National Democratic Party, and the Greens Party won
  the largest representation
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Merab Kostava Society, Vazha ADAMIA, chairman; Traditionalists' Union,
  Akaki ASATIANI, chairman; Georgian Social Democratic Party, Guram
  MUCHAIDZE, chairman; Green Party, Zurab ZHVANIA, chairman; Georgian
  Popular Front (GPF), Nodar NATADZE, chairman; National Democratic
  Party (NDP), Gia CHANTURIA, chairman; National Independence Party
  (NIP), Irakliy TSERETELI, chairmen; Charter 1991 Party, Tedo
  PATASHVILI, chairman; Peace Bloc; Unity; October 11
Other political or pressure groups: 
  supporters of ousted President Zuiad GAMSAKHURDIA (deceased 1 January
  1994) boycotted the October elections and remain a source of
  opposition and instability
Member of: 
  BSEC, CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, IBRD, IDA, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, IOC,
  ITU, NACC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Petr CHKHEIDZE 
chancery: 
  (temporary) Suite 424, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC 
telephone: 
  (202) 393-6060 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Kent N. BROWN 
embassy: 
  #25 Antoneli Street, T'bilisi 380026 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  (7) 8832-98-99-68 
FAX: 
  (7) 8832-93-37-59 
Flag: 
  maroon field with small rectangle in upper hoist side corner;
  rectangle divided horizontally with black on top, white below

@Georgia, Economy

Overview: 
  Georgia's economy has traditionally revolved around Black Sea tourism;
  cultivation of citrus fruits, tea, and grapes; mining of manganese and
  copper; and a small industrial sector producing wine, metals,
  machinery, chemicals, and textiles. The country imports the bulk of
  its energy needs, including natural gas and coal. Its only sizable
  domestic energy resource is hydropower. Since 1990, widespread
  conflicts, e.g., in Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Mengrelia, severely
  aggravated the economic crisis resulting from the disintegration of
  the Soviet command economy in December 1991. Throughout 1993, much of
  industry was functioning at only 20% of capacity; heavy disruptions in
  agricultural cultivation were reported; and tourism was shut down. The
  country is precariously dependent on US and EU humanitarian grain
  shipments, as most other foods are priced beyond reach of the average
  citizen. Georgia is also suffering from an acute energy crisis, as it
  is having problems paying for even minimal imports. Georgia is pinning
  its hopes for recovery on reestablishing trade ties with Russia and on
  developing international transportation through the key Black Sea
  ports of P'ot'i and Bat'umi.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $7.8 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Georgian statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -35% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,390 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  40.5% per month (2nd half 1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  officially less than 5% but real unemployment may be up near 20%, with
  even larger numbers of underemployed workers; real unemployment may be
  up near 20% with even larger numbers of underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  citrus fruits, tea, wine, other agricultural products; diverse types
  of machinery; ferrous and nonferrous metals; textiles; chemicals; fuel
  re-exports
partners: 
  Russia, Turkey, Armenia, Azerbaijan (1992)
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  fuel, grain and other foods, machinery and parts, transport equipment
partners: 
  Russia, Azerbaijan, Turkey (1993)
External debt: 
  $100 million to $200 million (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -27% (1993); accounts for 36% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  4,875,000 kW
production: 
  15.8 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,835 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  heavy industrial products include raw steel, rolled steel, airplanes;
  machine tools, foundry equipment, electric locomotives, tower cranes,
  electric welding equipment, machinery for food preparation and meat
  packing, electric motors, process control equipment, instruments;
  trucks, tractors, and other farm machinery; light industrial products,
  including cloth, hosiery, and shoes; chemicals; wood-working
  industries; the most important food industry is wine
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 41% of GDP; accounted for 97% of former USSR citrus
  fruits and 93% of former USSR tea; important producer of grapes; also
  cultivates vegetables and potatoes; dependent on imports for grain,
  dairy products, sugar; small livestock sector
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for domestic
  consumption; used as transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  heavily dependent on US for humanitarian grain shipments; EC granted
  around $70 million in trade credits in 1992 and another $40 million in
  1993; Turkey granted $50 million in 1993; smaller scale credits
  granted by Russia and China
Currency: 
  coupons introduced in April 1993 to be followed by introduction of the
  lari at undetermined future date; in July 1993 use of the Russian
  ruble was banned
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Georgia, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,570 km, does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  33,900 km 
paved and gravelled: 
  29,500 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 4,400 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 370 km; refined products 300 km; natural gas 440 km (1992)
Ports: 
  coastal - Bat'umi, P'ot'i, Sokhumi
Merchant marine: 
  41 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 575,823 GRT/882,110 DWT, bulk
  cargo 14, oil tanker 27 
Airports: 
total: 
  37 
usable: 
  27 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  14 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  4 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  poor telephone service; as of mid-1993, 672,000 telephone lines
  providing 14 lines per 100 persons; 339,000 unsatisfied applications
  for telephones (31 December 1990); international links via landline to
  CIS members and Turkey; low capacity satellite earth station and
  leased international connections via the Moscow international gateway
  switch with other countries; international electronic mail and telex
  service available
Note: 
  transportation network is disrupted by ethnic conflict, criminal
  activities, and fuel shortages

@Georgia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, Navy, Interior Ministry Troops, Border Guards 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,362,818; fit for military service 1,081,624; reach
  military age (18) annually 42,881 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GNP
Note: 
  Georgian forces are poorly organized and not fully under the
  government's control


@Germany, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, bordering the North Sea between France and Poland
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  356,910 sq km 
land area: 
  349,520 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Montana
note: 
  includes the formerly separate Federal Republic of Germany, the German
  Democratic Republic, and Berlin following formal unification on 3
  October 1990
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,621 km, Austria 784 km, Belgium 167 km, Czech Republic 646 km,
  Denmark 68 km, France 451 km, Luxembourg 138 km, Netherlands 577 km,
  Poland 456 km, Switzerland 334 km 
Coastline: 
  2,389 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm in North Sea and Schleswig-Holstein coast of Baltic Sea (extends,
  at one point, to 16 nm in the Helgolander Bucht); 12 nm in remainder
  of Baltic Sea
International disputes: 
  none 
Climate: 
  temperate and marine; cool, cloudy, wet winters and summers;
  occasional warm, tropical foehn wind; high relative humidity
Terrain: 
  lowlands in north, uplands in center, Bavarian Alps in south
Natural resources: 
  iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite, uranium, copper, natural gas,
  salt, nickel 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  34% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  16% 
forest and woodland: 
  30% 
other: 
  19% 
Irrigated land: 
  4,800 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  emissions from coal-burning utilities and industries in the southeast
  and lead emissions from vehicle exhausts (the result of continued use
  of leaded fuels) contribute to air pollution; acid rain, resulting
  from sulfur dioxide emissions, is damaging forests; heavy pollution in
  the Baltic Sea from raw sewage and industrial effluents from rivers in
  eastern Germany
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Hazardous Wastes
Note: 
  strategic location on North European Plain and along the entrance to
  the Baltic Sea

@Germany, People

Population: 
  81,087,506 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.36% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.04 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.89 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.39 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.34 years 
male: 
  73.22 years 
female: 
  79.64 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.47 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  German(s) 
adjective: 
  German 
Ethnic divisions: 
  German 95.1%, Turkish 2.3%, Italians 0.7%, Greeks 0.4%, Poles 0.4%,
  other 1.1% (made up largely of people fleeing the war in the former
  Yugoslavia)
Religions: 
  Protestant 45%, Roman Catholic 37%, unaffiliated or other 18% 
Languages: 
  German 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1977 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  36.75 million 
by occupation: 
  industry 41%, agriculture 6%, other 53% (1987)

@Germany, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Federal Republic of Germany 
conventional short form: 
  Germany 
local long form: 
  Bundesrepublik Deutschland 
local short form: 
  Deutschland 
Digraph: 
  GM
Type: 
  federal republic 
Capital: 
  Berlin 
note: 
  the shift from Bonn to Berlin will take place over a period of years
  with Bonn retaining many administrative functions and several
  ministries
Administrative divisions: 
  16 states (laender, singular - land); Baden-Wurttemberg, Bayern,
  Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Hessen, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern,
  Niedersachsen, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland,
  Sachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt, Schleswig-Holstein, Thuringen
Independence: 
  18 January 1871 (German Empire unification); divided into four zones
  of occupation (UK, US, USSR, and later, France) in 1945 following
  World War II; Federal Republic of Germany (FRG or West Germany)
  proclaimed 23 May 1949 and included the former UK, US, and French
  zones; German Democratic Republic (GDR or East Germany) proclaimed 7
  October 1949 and included the former USSR zone; unification of West
  Germany and East Germany took place 3 October 1990; all four power
  rights formally relinquished 15 March 1991
National holiday: 
  German Unity Day (Day of Unity), 3 October (1990) 
Constitution: 
  23 May 1949, known as Basic Law; became constitution of the united
  German people 3 October 1990
Legal system: 
  civil law system with indigenous concepts; judicial review of
  legislative acts in the Federal Constitutional Court; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Dr. Richard von WEIZSACKER (since 1 July 1984); note -
  presidential elections were held on 23 May 1994; Roman HERZOG was the
  winner and will be inaugurated 1 July 1994
head of government: 
  Chancellor Dr. Helmut KOHL (since 4 October 1982) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president upon the proposal of the
  chancellor
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral chamber (no official name for the two chambers as a whole)
Federal Assembly (Bundestag): 
  last held 2 December 1990 (next to be held by 16 October 1994);
  results - CDU 36.7%, SPD 33.5%, FDP 11.0%, CSU 7.1%, Green Party (West
  Germany) 3.9%, PDS 2.4%, Republikaner 2.1%, Alliance 90/Green Party
  (East Germany) 1.2%, other 2.1%; seats - (662 total) CDU 268, CSU 51,
  SPD 239, FDP 79, PDS 17, Greens/Alliance '90 8; elected by direct
  popular vote under a system combining direct and proportional
  representation; a party must win 5% of the national vote or 3 direct
  mandates to gain representation
Federal Council (Bundesrat): 
  State governments are directly represented by votes; each has 3 to 6
  votes depending on size and are required to vote as a block; current
  composition: votes - (68 total) SPD-led states 37, CDU-led states 31
Judicial branch: 
  Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Christian Democratic Union (CDU), Helmut KOHL, chairman; Christian
  Social Union (CSU), Theo WAIGEL, chairman; Free Democratic Party
  (FDP), Klaus KINKEL, chairman; Social Democratic Party (SPD), Rudolf
  SCHARPING, chairman; Alliance '90/Greens, Ludger VOLMER, Marianne
  BIRTHLER, co-chairmen; Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS), Lothar
  BISKY, chairman; Republikaner, Franz SCHOENHUBER; National Democratic
  Party (NPD), Guenter DECKERT; Communist Party (DKP), Rolf PRIEMER
Other political or pressure groups: 
  expellee, refugee, and veterans groups
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australian Group, BDEAC, BIS, CBSS, CCC,
  CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECE, EIB, ESA,
  FAO, G-5, G-7, G-10, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA,
  IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNHCR, UNOMIG,
  UNOSOM, UNTAC, UPU, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Immo STABREIT 
chancery: 
  4645 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 298-4000 
FAX: 
  (202) 298-4249 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, San Francisco, Seattle 
consulate(s): 
  Manila (Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands) and Wellington
  (America Samoa) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard C. HOLBROOKE 
embassy: 
  Deichmanns Avenue 29, 53170 Bonn 
mailing address: 
  Unit 21701, Bonn; APO AE 09080 
telephone: 
  [49] (228) 3391 
FAX: 
  [49] (228) 339-2663 
branch office: 
  Berlin 
consulate(s) general: 
  Frankfurt, Hamburg, Leipzig, Munich, and Stuttgart 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red, and yellow

@Germany, Economy

Overview: 
  With the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe in 1989, prospects
  seemed bright for a fairly rapid incorporation of East Germany into
  the highly successful West German economy. The Federal Republic,
  however, continues to experience difficulties in integrating and
  modernizing eastern Germany, and the tremendous costs of unification
  pushed western Germany into its deepest recession since World War II.
  The western German economy shrank by 1.9% in 1993 as the Bundesbank
  maintained high interest rates to offset the inflationary effects of
  large government deficits and high wage settlements. Eastern Germany
  grew by 7.1% in 1993 but this was from a shrunken base. Despite
  government transfers to the east amounting to nearly $110 billion
  annually, a self-sustaining economy in the region is still some years
  away. The bright spots are eastern Germany's construction,
  transportation, telecommunications, and service sectors, which have
  experienced strong growth. Western Germany has an advanced market
  economy and is a world leader in exports. It has a highly urbanized
  and skilled population that enjoys excellent living standards,
  abundant leisure time, and comprehensive social welfare benefits.
  Western Germany is relatively poor in natural resources, coal being
  the most important mineral. Western Germany's world-class companies
  manufacture technologically advanced goods. The region's economy is
  mature: services and manufacturing account for the dominant share of
  economic activity, and raw materials and semimanufactured goods
  constitute a large portion of imports. In recent years, manufacturing
  has accounted for about 31% of GDP, with other sectors contributing
  lesser amounts. Gross fixed investment in 1993 accounted for about
  20.5% of GDP. GDP in the western region is now $19,400 per capita, or
  78% of US per capita GDP. Eastern Germany's economy appears to be
  changing from one anchored on manufacturing into a more
  service-oriented economy. The German government, however, is intent on
  maintaining a manufacturing base in the east and is considering a
  policy for subsidizing industrial cores in the region. Eastern
  Germany's share of all-German GDP is only 8% and eastern productivity
  is just 30% that of the west even though eastern wages are at roughly
  70% of western levels. The privatization agency for eastern Germany,
  Treuhand, has privatized more than 90% of the 13,000 firms under its
  control and will likely wind down operations in 1994. Private
  investment in the region continues to be lackluster, resulting
  primarily from the deepening recession in western Germany and
  excessively high eastern wages. Eastern Germany has one of the world's
  largest reserves of low-grade lignite coal but little else in the way
  of mineral resources. The quality of statistics from eastern Germany
  is improving, yet many gaps remain; the federal government began
  producing all-German data for select economic statistics at the start
  of 1992. The most challenging economic problem is promoting eastern
  Germany's economic reconstruction - specifically, finding the right
  mix of fiscal, monetary, regulatory, and tax policies that will spur
  investment in eastern Germany - without destabilizing western
  Germany's economy or damaging relations with West European partners.
  The government hopes a "solidarity pact" among labor unions, business,
  state governments, and the SPD opposition will provide the right mix
  of wage restraints, investment incentives, and spending cuts to
  stimulate eastern recovery. Finally, the homogeneity of the German
  economic culture has been changed by the admission of large numbers of
  immigrants.
National product: 
Germany: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.331 trillion (1993)
western: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.218 trillion (1993)
eastern: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $112.7 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
Germany: 
  -1.2% (1993)
western: 
  -1.9% (1993)
eastern: 
  7.1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
Germany: 
  $16,500 (1993)
western: 
  $19,400 (1993)
eastern: 
  $6,300 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
western: 
  4.2% (1993)
eastern: 
  8.9% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
western: 
  8.1% (December 1993)
eastern: 
  15.4% (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $918 billion 
expenditures: 
  $972 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $392 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  manufactures 89.0% (including machines and machine tools, chemicals,
  motor vehicles, iron and steel products), agricultural products 5.4%,
  raw materials 2.2%, fuels 1.3% (1922)
partners: 
  EC 51.3% (France 11.1%, Netherlands 8.3%, Italy 8.2%, UK 7.9%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 7.5%), EFTA 13.3%, US 6.8%, Eastern Europe 5.0%,
  OPEC 3.3% (1993)
Imports: 
  $374.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  manufactures 74.9%, agricultural products 10.3%, fuels 7.4%, raw
  materials 5.5% (1992)
partners: 
  EC 49.7 (France 11.0%, Netherlands 9.2%, Italy 8.8%, UK 6.6%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 6.7%), EFTA 12.7%, US 5.9%, Japan 5.2%, Eastern
  Europe 4.8%, OPEC 2.6% (1993)
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
western: 
  growth rate -7% (1993)
eastern: 
  growth rate $NA
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  134,000,000 kW
production: 
  580 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  7,160 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
western: 
  among world's largest producers of iron, steel, coal, cement,
  chemicals, machinery, vehicles, machine tools, electronics; food and
  beverages
eastern: 
  metal fabrication, chemicals, brown coal, shipbuilding, machine
  building, food and beverages, textiles, petroleum refining
Agriculture: 
western: 
  accounts for about 2% of GDP (including fishing and forestry);
  diversified crop and livestock farming; principal crops and livestock
  include potatoes, wheat, barley, sugar beets, fruit, cabbage, cattle,
  pigs, poultry; net importer of food
eastern: 
  accounts for about 10% of GDP (including fishing and forestry);
  principal crops - wheat, rye, barley, potatoes, sugar beets, fruit;
  livestock products include pork, beef, chicken, milk, hides and skins;
  net importer of food
Illicit drugs: 
  source of precursor chemicals for South American cocaine processors;
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and Latin American
  cocaine for West European markets
Economic aid: 
western-donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $75.5 billion 
eastern-donor: 
  bilateral to non-Communist less developed countries (1956-89) $4
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 deutsche mark (DM) = 100 pfennige
Exchange rates: 
  deutsche marks (DM) per US$1 - 1.7431 (January 1994), 1.6533 (1993),
  1.5617 (1992), 1.6595 (1991), 1.6157 (1990), 1.8800 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Germany, Communications

Railroads: 
western: 
  31,443 km total; 27,421 km government owned, 1.435-meter standard
  gauge (12,491 km double track, 11,501 km electrified); 4,022 km
  nongovernment owned, including 3,598 km 1.435-meter standard gauge
  (214 km electrified) and 424 km 1.000-meter gauge (186 km electrified)
eastern: 
  14,025 km total; 13,750 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, 275 km
  1.000-meter or other narrow gauge; 3,830 (est.) km 1.435-meter
  standard gauge double-track; 3,475 km overhead electrified (1988)
Highways: 
total: 
  625,600 km (1991 est.); western - 501,000 km (1990 est.); eastern -
  124,600 km (1988 est.)
paved: 
  543,200 km, including 10,814 km of expressways; western - 495,900 km,
  including 8,959 km of expressways; eastern - 47,300 km, including
  1,855 km of expressways
unpaved: 
  82,400 km; western - 5,000 km earth; eastern - 77,400 km gravel and
  earth
Inland waterways: 
western: 
  5,222 km, of which almost 70% are usable by craft of 1,000-metric-ton
  capacity or larger; major rivers include the Rhine and Elbe; Kiel
  Canal is an important connection between the Baltic Sea and North Sea
eastern: 
  2,319 km (1988)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 3,644 km; petroleum products 3,946 km; natural gas 97,564 km
  (1988)
Ports: 
  coastal - Bremerhaven, Brunsbuttel, Cuxhaven, Emden, Bremen, Hamburg,
  Kiel, Lubeck, Wilhelmshaven, Rostock, Wismar, Stralsund, Sassnitz;
  inland - 31 major on Rhine and Elbe rivers
Merchant marine: 
  485 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,541,441 GRT/5,835,511 DWT,
  barge carrier 7, bulk 11, cargo 241, chemical tanker 20, combination
  bulk 6, combination ore/oil 5, container 132, liquefied gas tanker 16,
  oil tanker 7, passenger 3, railcar carrier 5, refrigerated cargo 7,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 20, short-sea passenger 5 
note: 
  the German register includes ships of the former East and West Germany
Airports: 
total: 
  590 
usable: 
  583 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  308 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  85 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  97 
Telecommunications: 
western: 
  highly developed, modern telecommunication service to all parts of the
  country; fully adequate in all respects; 40,300,000 telephones;
  intensively developed, highly redundant cable and microwave radio
  relay networks, all completely automatic; broadcast stations - 80 AM,
  470 FM, 225 (6,000 repeaters) TV; 6 submarine coaxial cables;
  satellite earth stations - 12 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT antennas, 2
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT antennas, EUTELSAT, and domestic systems; 2 HF
  radiocommunication centers; tropospheric links
eastern: 
  badly needs modernization; 3,970,000 telephones; broadcast stations -
  23 AM, 17 FM, 21 TV (15 Soviet TV repeaters); 6,181,860 TVs; 6,700,000
  radios; 1 satellite earth station operating in INTELSAT and
  Intersputnik systems

@Germany, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 20,253,482; fit for military service 17,506,468; reach
  military age (18) annually 418,124 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $37.3 billion, 2% of GDP (1993)


@Ghana, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Cote
  d'Ivoire and Togo
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  238,540 sq km 
land area: 
  230,020 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Oregon
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,093 km, Burkina 548 km, Cote d'Ivoire 668 km, Togo 877 km 
Coastline: 
  539 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; warm and comparatively dry along southeast coast; hot and
  humid in southwest; hot and dry in north
Terrain: 
  mostly low plains with dissected plateau in south-central area
Natural resources: 
  gold, timber, industrial diamonds, bauxite, manganese, fish, rubber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% 
permanent crops: 
  7% 
meadows and pastures: 
  15% 
forest and woodland: 
  37% 
other: 
  36% 
Irrigated land: 
  80 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  recent drought in north severely affecting agricultural activities;
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; poaching and habitat
  destruction threatens wildlife populations; water pollution; limited
  supply of safe drinking water
natural hazards: 
  dry, dusty, harmattan winds occur from January to March
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  Lake Volta is the world's largest artificial lake; northeasterly
  harmattan wind (January to March)

@Ghana, People

Population: 
  17,225,185 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.09% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  44.13 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.27 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.97 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  83.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  55.52 years 
male: 
  53.58 years 
female: 
  57.52 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.15 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ghanaian(s) 
adjective: 
  Ghanaian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black African 99.8% (major tribes - Akan 44%, Moshi-Dagomba 16%, Ewe
  13%, Ga 8%), European and other 0.2% 
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 38%, Muslim 30%, Christian 24%, other 8% 
Languages: 
  English (official), African languages (including Akan, Moshi-Dagomba,
  Ewe, and Ga)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  60% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  51% 
Labor force: 
  3.7 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and fishing 54.7%, industry 18.7%, sales and clerical
  15.2%, services, transportation, and communications 7.7%, professional
  3.7%
note: 
  48% of population of working age (1983)

@Ghana, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Ghana 
conventional short form: 
  Ghana 
former: 
  Gold Coast 
Digraph: 
  GH
Type: 
  constitutional democracy 
Capital: 
  Accra 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 regions; Ashanti, Brong-Ahafo, Central, Eastern, Greater Accra,
  Northern, Upper East, Upper West, Volta, Western
Independence: 
  6 March 1957 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 6 March (1957) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution approved 28 April 1992
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and customary law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  universal at 18
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Jerry John RAWLINGS (since 3 November 1992) election last
  held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; president nominates members subject to approval by the
  Parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections last held 29 December 1992 (next to be held NA)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Democratic Congress, Jerry John Rawlings; New Patriotic
  Party, Albert Adu BOAHEN; People's Heritage Party, Alex Erskine;
  various other smaller parties
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-24, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ekwow SPIO-GARBRAH 
chancery: 
  3512 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 686-4520 
FAX: 
  (202) 686-4527 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Kenneth L. BROWN 
embassy: 
  Ring Road East, East of Danquah Circle, Accra 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 194, Accra 
telephone: 
  [233] (21) 775348, 775349, 775297 or 775298 
FAX: 
  [233] (21) 776008 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), yellow, and green with a
  large black five-pointed star centered in the gold band; uses the
  popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the flag of
  Bolivia, which has a coat of arms centered in the yellow band

@Ghana, Economy

Overview: 
  Supported by substantial international assistance, Ghana has been
  implementing a steady economic rebuilding program since 1983,
  including moves toward privatization and relaxation of government
  controls. The agriculture sector consists largely of small traditional
  farm holdings, rain-fed for the most part. Heavily dependent on cocoa,
  gold, and timber exports, economic growth so far has not spread
  substantially to other areas of the economy. The costs of sending
  peacekeeping forces to Liberia and preparing for the transition to a
  democratic government have boosted government expenditures and
  undercut structural adjustment reforms. Ghana opened a stock exchange
  in 1990 and plans to float 5% of its stake in Ashanti Goldfields
  Corporation, which would make the exchange the largest in sub-Saharan
  Africa outside of South Africa.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $25 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.9% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  10% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  10% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $905 million, including capital expenditures of $200 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  cocoa 40%, gold, timber, tuna, bauxite, and aluminum
partners: 
  Germany 31%, US 12%, UK 11%, Netherlands 6%, Japan 5% (1991)
Imports: 
  $1.5 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  petroleum 16%, consumer goods, foods, intermediate goods, capital
  equipment
partners: 
  UK 22%, US 11%, Germany 9%, Japan 6%
External debt: 
  $4.6 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate in manufacturing (1992); accounts for almost 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,180,000 kW
production: 
  4.49 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  290 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  mining, lumbering, light manufacturing, aluminum, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 43% of GDP (including fishing and forestry); the major
  cash crop is cocoa; other principal crops - rice, coffee, cassava,
  peanuts, corn, shea nuts, timber; normally self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; transit
  hub for Southwest and Southeast Asian heroin destined for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $455 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2.6
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $78 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89) $106 million 
Currency: 
  1 new cedi (C) = 100 pesewas
Exchange rates: 
  new cedis per US$1 - 713.00 (October 1993), 437.09 (1992), 367.83
  (1991), 326.33 (1990), 270.00 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Ghana, Communications

Railroads: 
  953 km, all 1.067-meter gauge; 32 km double track; railroads
  undergoing major renovation
Highways: 
total: 
  32,250 km 
paved: 
  concrete, bituminous 6,084 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, improved earth 26,166 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Volta, Ankobra, and Tano Rivers provide 168 km of perennial navigation
  for launches and lighters; Lake Volta provides 1,125 km of arterial
  and feeder waterways
Pipelines: 
  none
Ports: 
  Tema, Takoradi
Merchant marine: 
  5 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 46,289 GRT/61,606 DWT, cargo 4,
  refrigerated cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  11 
usable: 
  11 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  6 
Telecommunications: 
  poor to fair system handled primarily by microwave radio relay links;
  42,300 telephones; broadcast stations - 4 AM, 1 FM, 4 (8 translators)
  TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Ghana, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force, Civil Defense 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 3,867,183; fit for military service 2,159,769; reach
  military age (18) annually 170,283 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $30 million, less than 1% of GDP (1989
  est.)


@Gibraltar

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Gibraltar, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Europe, bordering the Strait of Gibraltar, which links
  the North Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, on the southern
  coast of Spain
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  6.5 sq km 
land area: 
  6.5 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 1.2 km, Spain 1.2 km 
Coastline: 
  12 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  3 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  source of occasional friction between Spain and the UK
Climate: 
  Mediterranean with mild winters and warm summers
Terrain: 
  a narrow coastal lowland borders The Rock
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  natural freshwater sources are meager, so large concrete or natural
  rock water catchments collect rain water
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategic location on Strait of Gibraltar that links the North
  Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea

@Gibraltar, People

Population: 
  31,684 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.58% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.37 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.87 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.33 years 
male: 
  73.44 years 
female: 
  79.19 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Gibraltarian(s) 
adjective: 
  Gibraltar 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Italian, English, Maltese, Portuguese, Spanish 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 74%, Protestant 11% (Church of England 8%, other 3%),
  Moslem 8%, Jewish 2%, none or other 5% (1981)
Languages: 
  English (used in schools and for official purposes), Spanish, Italian,
  Portuguese, Russian 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  14,800 (including non-Gibraltar laborers)
note: 
  UK military establishments and civil government employ nearly 50% of
  the labor force

@Gibraltar, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Gibraltar 
Digraph: 
  GI
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Gilbraltar 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Commonwealth Day (second Monday of March) 
Constitution: 
  30 May 1969
Legal system: 
  English law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal, plus other UK subjects resident six months
  or more
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  and Commander in Chief Gen. Sir John CHAPPLE (since NA March 1993) 
head of government: 
  Chief Minister Joe BOSSANO (since 25 March 1988) 
Gibraltar Council: 
  advises the governor
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed from the elected members of the
  Assembly by the governor in consultation with the chief minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held on 16 January 1992 (next to be held January 1996);
  results - SL 73.3%; seats - (18 total, 15 elected) number of seats by
  party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Gibraltar Socialist Labor Party (SL), Joe BOSSANO; Gibraltar Labor
  Party/Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights (GCL/AACR),
  leader NA; Gibraltar Social Democrats, Peter CARUANA; Gibraltar
  National Party, Joe GARCIA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Housewives Association; Chamber of Commerce; Gibraltar Representatives
  Organization
Member of: 
  INTERPOL (subbureau) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  two horizontal bands of white (top, double width) and red with a
  three-towered red castle in the center of the white band; hanging from
  the castle gate is a gold key centered in the red band

@Gibraltar, Economy

Overview: 
  The British military presence has been severely reduced and now only
  contributes about 11% to the local economy. The financial sector
  accounts for 15% of GDP; tourism and shipping services fees also
  generate income. Because more than 70% of the economy is in the public
  sector, changes in government spending have a major impact on the
  level of employment. Construction workers are particularly affected
  when government expenditures are cut.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $182 million (FY87)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (FY87)
National product per capita: 
  $4,600 (FY87)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.6% (1988)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $136 million 
expenditures: 
  $139 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY88)
Exports: 
  $82 million (f.o.b., 1988)
commodities: 
  (principally re-exports) petroleum 51%, manufactured goods 41%, other
  8%
partners: 
  UK, Morocco, Portugal, Netherlands, Spain, US, FRG
Imports: 
  $258 million (c.i.f., 1988)
commodities: 
  fuels, manufactured goods, and foodstuffs
partners: 
  UK, Spain, Japan, Netherlands
External debt: 
  $318 million (1987)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  47,000 kW
production: 
  200 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,740 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, banking and finance, construction, commerce; support to large
  UK naval and air bases; transit trade and supply depot in the port;
  light manufacturing of tobacco, roasted coffee, ice, mineral waters,
  candy, beer, and canned fish
Agriculture: 
  none
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-88), $800,000; Western (non-US)
  countries and ODA bilateral commitments (1992-93), $2.5 million 
Currency: 
  1 Gibraltar pound (#G) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Gibraltar pounds (#G) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6658 (1993),
  0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989); note - the
  Gibraltar pound is at par with the British pound
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Gibraltar, Communications

Railroads: 
  1.000-meter-gauge system in dockyard area only
Highways: 
total: 
  50 km 
paved: 
  50 km 
Pipelines: 
  none
Ports: 
  Gibraltar
Merchant marine: 
  29 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 496,898 GRT/857,140 DWT, bulk 5,
  cargo 4, chemical tanker 2, container 1, oil tanker 16, refrigerated
  cargo 1 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate, automatic domestic system and adequate international
  radiocommunication and microwave facilities; 9,400 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, 6 FM, 4 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@Gibraltar, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  British Army, Royal Navy, Royal Air Force 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Glorioso Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (possession of France) 

@Glorioso Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the Indian Ocean just north of Madagascar
Map references: 
  Africa 
Area: 
total area: 
  5 sq km 
land area: 
  5 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 8.5 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Ile Glorieuse, Ile du Lys, Verte Rocks, Wreck Rock, and South
  Rock
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  35.2 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Madagascar
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  NA
Natural resources: 
  guano, coconuts 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (all lush vegetation and coconut palms)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to periodic cyclones
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Glorioso Islands, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Glorioso Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Glorioso Islands 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Iles Glorieuses 
Digraph: 
  GO
Type: 
  French possession administered by Commissioner of the Republic,
  resident in Reunion
Capital: 
  none; administered by France from Reunion
Independence: 
  none (possession of France)

@Glorioso Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Glorioso Islands, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runsways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 

@Glorioso Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Greece, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southern Europe, bordering the Mediterranean Sea between
  Turkey and Bulgaria
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  131,940 sq km 
land area: 
  130,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Alabama
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,210 km, Albania 282 km, Bulgaria 494 km, Turkey 206 km, The
  Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 228 km 
Coastline: 
  13,676 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  6 nm, but Greece has threatened to claim 12 nm
International disputes: 
  air, continental shelf, and territorial water disputes with Turkey in
  Aegean Sea; Cyprus question; dispute with The Former Yugoslav Republic
  of Macedonia over name and symbol implying territorial claim
Climate: 
  temperate; mild, wet winters; hot, dry summers
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with ranges extending into sea as peninsulas or
  chains of islands
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, lignite, magnesite, petroleum, marble 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  23% 
permanent crops: 
  8% 
meadows and pastures: 
  40% 
forest and woodland: 
  20% 
other: 
  9% 
Irrigated land: 
  11,900 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution; water pollution
natural hazards: 
  subject to severe earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Environmental
  Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands; signed, but not
  ratified - Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Volatile
  Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location dominating the Aegean Sea and southern approach to
  Turkish Straits; a peninsular country, possessing an archipelago of
  about 2,000 islands

@Greece, People

Population: 
  10,564,630 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.84% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  10.5 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.32 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  7.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.71 years 
male: 
  75.2 years 
female: 
  80.35 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.45 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Greek(s) 
adjective: 
  Greek 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Greek 98%, other 2% 
note: 
  the Greek Government states there are no ethnic divisions in Greece
Religions: 
  Greek Orthodox 98%, Muslim 1.3%, other 0.7% 
Languages: 
  Greek (official), English, French 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  89% 
Labor force: 
  4.083 million 
by occupation: 
  services 48%, agriculture 24%, industry 28% (1993)

@Greece, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Hellenic Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Greece 
local long form: 
  Elliniki Dhimokratia 
local short form: 
  Ellas 
former: 
  Kingdom of Greece 
Digraph: 
  GR
Type: 
  presidential parliamentary government; monarchy rejected by referendum
  8 December 1974
Capital: 
  Athens 
Administrative divisions: 
  52 prefectures (nomoi, singular - nomos); Aitolia kai Akarnania,
  Akhaia, Argolis, Arkadhia, Arta, Attiki, Dhodhekanisos, Dhrama,
  Evritania, Evros, Evvoia, Florina, Fokis, Fthiotis, Grevena, Ilia,
  Imathia, Ioannina, Iraklion, Kardhitsa, Kastoria, Kavala, Kefallinia,
  Kerkira, Khalkidhiki, Khania, Khios, Kikladhes, Kilkis, Korinthia,
  Kozani, Lakonia, Larisa, Lasithi, Lesvos, Levkas, Magnisia, Messinia,
  Pella, Pieria, Piraievs, Preveza, Rethimni, Rodhopi, Samos, Serrai,
  Thesprotia, Thessaloniki, Trikala, Voiotia, Xanthi, Zakinthos,
  autonomous region: Agion Oros (Mt. Athos)
Independence: 
  1829 (from the Ottoman Empire)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 25 March (1821) (proclamation of the war of
  independence) 
Constitution: 
  11 June 1975
Legal system: 
  based on codified Roman law; judiciary divided into civil, criminal,
  and administrative courts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Konstantinos KARAMANLIS (since 5 May 1990); election last
  held 4 May 1990 (next to be held May 1995); results - Konstantinos
  KARAMANLIS was elected by Parliament
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Andreas PAPANDREOU (since 10 October 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president on recommendation of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Chamber of Deputies (Vouli ton Ellinon): 
  elections last held 10 October 1993 (next to be held by NA October
  1997); results - PASOK 46.88%, ND 39.30%, Political Spring 4.87%, KKE
  4.54%, and Progressive Left Coalition 2.94%; seats - (300 total) PASOK
  170, ND 111, Political Spring 10, KKE 9
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Judicial Court, Special Supreme Tribunal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  New Democracy (ND; conservative), Miltiades EVERT; Panhellenic
  Socialist Movement (PASOK), Andreas PAPANDREOU; Progressive Left
  Coalition, Maria DAMANAKI; Democratic Renewal (DIANA), Konstantinos
  STEFANOPOULOS; Communist Party (KKE), Aleka PAPARIGA;
  Ecologist-Alternative List, leader rotates; Political Spring, Antonis
  SAMARAS
Member of: 
  Australian Group, BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC,
  ECE, EIB, FAO, G-6, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO,
  ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
  UNOMIG, UNOSOM, UPU, WEU (associate), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Loucas TSILAS 
chancery: 
  2221 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-5800 
FAX: 
  (202) 939-5824 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and San
  Francisco 
consulate(s): 
  New Orleans 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Thomas M.T. NILES 
embassy: 
  91 Vasilissis Sophias Boulevard, 10160 Athens 
mailing address: 
  PSC 108, Athens; APO AE 09842 
telephone: 
  [30] (1) 721-2951 or 721-8401 
FAX: 
  [30] (1) 645-6282 
consulate(s) general: 
  Thessaloniki 
Flag: 
  nine equal horizontal stripes of blue alternating with white; there is
  a blue square in the upper hoist-side corner bearing a white cross;
  the cross symbolizes Greek Orthodoxy, the established religion of the
  country

@Greece, Economy

Overview: 
  Greece has a mixed capitalist economy with the basic entrepreneurial
  system overlaid in 1981-89 by a socialist system that enlarged the
  public sector from 55% of GDP in 1981 to about 70% in 1989. Since
  then, the public sector has been reduced to about 60% of GDP. Tourism
  continues as a major source of foreign exchange, and agriculture is
  self-sufficient except for meat, dairy products, and animal
  feedstuffs. Over the last decade, real GDP growth has averaged 1.6% a
  year, compared with the European Union average of 2.2%. Inflation is
  four times the EU average, and the national debt has reached 140% of
  GDP, the highest in the EU. Prime Minister PAPANDREOU will probably
  only make limited progress correcting the economy's problems of high
  inflation, large budget deficit, and decaying infrastructure. His
  economic program suggests that although he will shun his expansionary
  policies of the 1980s, he will avoid tough measures needed to slow
  inflation or reduce the state's role in the economy. He has limited
  the previous government's privatization plans, for example, and has
  called for generous welfare spending and real wage increases. In 1994,
  the GDP growth rate is likely to remain low, and inflation probably
  will accelerate, remaining the highest in the EU. PAPANDREOU'S failure
  to improve the country's economic performance will further strain
  relations with the EU. Since Greece's accession to the then EC in
  1981, Athens' heavy reliance on EU aid - amounting to about 6% of
  Greek GDP annually - and its poor use of Union funds have riled
  Brussels. Its ailing economy will continue to be a drag on European
  economic and monetary union.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $93.2 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $8,900 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  14.4% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  9.5% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $28.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $37.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.2 billion (1994)
Exports: 
  $6 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods 53%, foodstuffs 34%, fuels 5%
partners: 
  Germany 23%, Italy 18%, France 7%, UK 7%, US 4% (1992)
Imports: 
  $23.3 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods 72%, foodstuffs 15%, fuels 10%
partners: 
  Germany 20%, Italy 14%, France 8%, Netherlands 7%, Japan 6% (1992)
External debt: 
  $23.1 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1.3% (1992); accounts for 20% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,500,000 kW
production: 
  36.4 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,610 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food and tobacco processing, textiles, chemicals, metal products,
  tourism, mining, petroleum
Agriculture: 
  including fishing and forestry, accounts for 15% of GDP and 24% of the
  labor force; principal products - wheat, corn, barley, sugar beets,
  olives, tomatoes, wine, tobacco, potatoes; self-sufficient in food
  except meat, dairy products, and animal feedstuffs
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis and limited opium; mostly for domestic
  production; serves as a gateway to Europe for traffickers smuggling
  cannabis and heroin from the Middle East and Southwest Asia to the
  West and precursor chemicals to the East; transshipment point for
  Southwest Asian heroin transiting the Balkan route
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-81), $525 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.39
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 drachma (Dr) = 100 lepta
Exchange rates: 
  drachmae (Dr) per US$1 - 250.28 (January 1994), 229.26 (1993), 190.62
  (1992), 182.27 (1991), 158.51 (1990), 162.42 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Greece, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,479 km total; 1,565 km 1,435-mm standard gauge, of which 36 km
  electrified and 100 km double track; 892 km 1,000-mm gauge; 22 km
  750-mm narrow gauge; all government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  38,938 km 
paved: 
  16,090 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel 13,676 km; improved earth 5,632 km; unimproved
  earth 3,540 km 
Inland waterways: 
  80 km; system consists of three coastal canals; including the Corinth
  Canal (6 km) which crosses the Isthmus of Corinth connecting the Gulf
  of Corinth with the Saronic Gulf and shortens the sea voyage from the
  Adriatic to Piraievs (Piraeus) by 325 km; and three unconnected rivers
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 26 km; petroleum products 547 km 
Ports: 
  Piraievs (Piraeus), Thessaloniki
Merchant marine: 
  1,059 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 29,343,367 GRT/54,249,294
  DWT, bulk 453, cargo 117, chemical tanker 20, combination bulk 23,
  combination ore/oil 38, container 36, liquefied gas 6, livestock
  carrier 1, oil tanker 251, passenger 15, passenger-cargo 2,
  refrigerated cargo 11, roll-on/roll-off cargo 17, short-sea passenger
  65, specialized tanker 3, vehicle carrier 1 
note: 
  ethnic Greeks also own large numbers of ships under the registry of
  Liberia, Panama, Cyprus, Malta, and The Bahamas
Airports: 
total: 
  78 
usable: 
  77 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  63 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  20 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  24 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate, modern networks reach all areas; 4,080,000 telephones;
  microwave radio relay carries most traffic; extensive open-wire
  network; submarine cables to off-shore islands; broadcast stations -
  29 AM, 17 (20 repeaters) FM, 361 TV; tropospheric links, 8 submarine
  cables; 1 satellite earth station operating in INTELSAT (1 Atlantic
  Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean antenna), and EUTELSAT systems

@Greece, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Hellenic Army, Hellenic Navy, Hellenic Air Force, National Guard,
  Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,645,859; fit for military service 2,025,212; reach
  military age (21) annually 74,484 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $4.0 billion, 5.4% of GDP (1993)


@Greenland

Header
Affiliation: 
  (part of the Danish realm) 

@Greenland, Geography

Location: 
  Northern North America, in the North Atlantic Ocean, between Canada
  and Norway
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, North America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,175,600 sq km 
land area: 
  383,600 sq km (ice free)
comparative area: 
  slightly more than three times the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  44,087 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  dispute betwen Denmark and Norway over maritime boundary in Arctic
  Ocean between Greenland and Jan Mayen has been settled by the
  International Court of Justice (ICJ)
Climate: 
  arctic to subarctic; cool summers, cold winters
Terrain: 
  flat to gradually sloping icecap covers all but a narrow, mountainous,
  barren, rocky coast
Natural resources: 
  zinc, lead, iron ore, coal, molybdenum, cryolite, uranium, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  99% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  dominates North Atlantic Ocean between North America and Europe;
  sparse population confined to small settlements along coast;
  continuous permafrost over northern two-thirds of the island

@Greenland, People

Population: 
  57,040 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.94% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  18.6 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.43 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.75 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  26.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  66.91 years 
male: 
  62.55 years 
female: 
  71.28 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.29 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Greenlander(s) 
adjective: 
  Greenlandic 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Greenlander 86% (Eskimos and Greenland-born Caucasians), Danish 14% 
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 
Languages: 
  Eskimo dialects, Danish 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  22,800 
by occupation: 
  largely engaged in fishing, hunting, sheep breeding

@Greenland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Greenland 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Kalaallit Nunaat 
Digraph: 
  GL
Type: 
  part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas administrative
  division
Capital: 
  Nuuk (Godthab) 
Administrative divisions: 
  3 municipalities (kommuner, singular - kommun); Nordgronland,
  Ostgronland, Vestgronland
Independence: 
  none (part of the Danish realm; self-governing overseas administrative
  division)
National holiday: 
  Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940) 
Constitution: 
  5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)
Legal system: 
  Danish
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen MARGRETHE II (since 14 January 1972), represented by High
  Commissioner Torben Hede PEDERSEN (since NA) 
head of government: 
  Home Rule Chairman Lars Emil JOHANSEN (since 15 March 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Landsstyre; formed from the Landsting on basis of strength of parties
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Landsting): 
  elections last held on 5 March 1991 (next to be held 5 March 1995);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (27 total) Siumut 11,
  Atassut Party 8, Inuit Ataqatigiit 5, Center Party 2, Polar Party 1
Danish Folketing: 
  last held on 12 December 1990 (next to be held by December 1994);
  Greenland elects two representatives to the Folketing; results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (2 total) Siumut 1, Atassut 1
Judicial branch: 
  High Court (Landsret) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  two-party ruling coalition; Siumut (a moderate socialist party that
  advocates more distinct Greenlandic identity and greater autonomy from
  Denmark), Lars Emil JOHANSEN, chairman; Inuit Ataqatigiit (IA; a
  Marxist-Leninist party that favors complete independence from Denmark
  rather than home rule), Arqaluk LYNGE; Atassut Party (a more
  conservative party that favors continuing close relations with
  Denmark), leader NA; Polar Party (conservative-Greenland nationalist),
  Lars CHEMNITZ; Center Party (a new nonsocialist protest party), leader
  NA
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red with a large disk
  slightly to the hoist side of center - the top half of the disk is
  red, the bottom half is white

@Greenland, Economy

Overview: 
  Greenland's economic situation at present is difficult. Unemployment
  is increasing, and prospects for economic growth in the immediate
  future are dim. Following the closing of the Black Angel lead and zinc
  mine in 1989, Greenland became almost completely dependent on fishing
  and fish processing, the sector accounting for 95% of exports.
  Prospects for fisheries are not bright, as the important shrimp
  catches will at best stabilize and cod catches have dropped.
  Resumption of mining and hydrocarbon activities is not around the
  corner, thus leaving only tourism with some potential for the near
  future. The public sector in Greenland, i.e., the central government
  and its commercial entities and the municipalities, plays a dominant
  role in Greenland accounting for about two-thirds of total employment.
  About half the government's revenues come from grants from the Danish
  Government.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $500 million (1988)
National product real growth rate: 
  -10% (1990)
National product per capita: 
  $9,000 (1988)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.6% (1991)
Unemployment rate: 
  9% (1990 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $381 million 
expenditures: 
  $381 million, including capital expenditures of $36 million (1989)
Exports: 
  $340.6 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  fish and fish products 95%
partners: 
  Denmark 79%, Benelux 9%, Germany 5%
Imports: 
  $403 million (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods 28%, machinery and transport equipment 24%, food
  and live animals 12.4%, petroleum products 12%
partners: 
  Denmark 65%, Norway 8.8%, US 4.6%, Germany 3.8%, Japan 3.8%, Sweden
  2.4%
External debt: 
  $480 million (1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  84,000 kW
production: 
  176 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,060 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  fish processing (mainly shrimp), lead and zinc mining, handicrafts,
  some small shipyards, potential for platinum and gold mining
Agriculture: 
  sector dominated by fishing and sheep raising; crops limited to forage
  and small garden vegetables; 1988 fish catch of 133,500 metric tons
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere
Exchange rates: 
  Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1 - 6.771 (January 1994), 6.484 (1993),
  6.036 (1992), 6.396 (1991), 6.189 (1990), 7.310 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Greenland, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  150 km 
paved: 
  60 km 
unpaved: 
  90 km 
Ports: 
  Kangerluarsoruseq (Faeringehavn), Paamiut (Frederikshaab), Nuuk
  (Godthaab), Sisimiut (Holsteinsborg), Julianehaab, Maarmorilik, North
  Star Bay
Airports: 
total: 
  11 
usable: 
  8 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate domestic and international service provided by cables and
  microwave radio relay; 17,900 telephones; broadcast stations - 5 AM, 7
  (35 repeaters) FM, 4 (9 repeaters) TV; 2 coaxial submarine cables; 1
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Greenland, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is responsibility of Denmark


@Grenada, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about 150 im north of
  Trinidad and Tobago
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  340 sq km 
land area: 
  340 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  121 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; tempered by northeast trade winds
Terrain: 
  volcanic in origin with central mountains
Natural resources: 
  timber, tropical fruit, deepwater harbors 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  15% 
permanent crops: 
  26% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  9% 
other: 
  47% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  lies on edge of hurricane belt; hurricane season lasts from June to
  November
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not
  ratified - Climate Change
Note: 
  islands of the Grenadines group are divided politically with Saint
  Vincent and the Grenadines

@Grenada, People

Population: 
  94,109 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.35% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  30.28 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.19 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -20.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.4 years 
male: 
  68 years 
female: 
  72.85 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.93 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Grenadian(s) 
adjective: 
  Grenadian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black African 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic, Anglican, other Protestant sects 
Languages: 
  English (official), French patois 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  36,000 
by occupation: 
  services 31%, agriculture 24%, construction 8%, manufacturing 5%,
  other 32% (1985)

@Grenada, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Grenada 
Digraph: 
  GJ
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Saint George's 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 parishes and 1 dependency*; Carriacou and Petit Martinique*, Saint
  Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint John, Saint Mark, Saint
  Patrick
Independence: 
  7 February 1974 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 7 February (1974) 
Constitution: 
  19 December 1973
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Reginald Oswald PALMER (since 6 August 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Nicholas BRATHWAITE (since 13 March 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on advice of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  consists of a 13-member body, 10 appointed by the government and 3 by
  the Leader of the Opposition
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held on 13 March 1990 (next to be held by NA March
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (15 total) NDC
  7, GULP 4, TNP 2, NNP 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Democratic Congress (NDC), Nicholas BRATHWAITE; Grenada
  United Labor Party (GULP), Sir Eric GAIRY; The National Party (TNP),
  Ben JONES; New National Party (NNP), Keith MITCHELL; Maurice Bishop
  Patriotic Movement (MBPM), Terrence MARRYSHOW
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, OECS,
  OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Denneth MODESTE 
chancery: 
  1701 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-2561 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Charge d'Affaires Ollie P. ANDERSON 
embassy: 
  Point Salines, Saint George's 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 54, Saint George's, Grenada, W.I. 
telephone: 
  (809) 444-1173 through 1178 
FAX: 
  (809) 444-4820 
Flag: 
  a rectangle divided diagonally into yellow triangles (top and bottom)
  and green triangles (hoist side and outer side) with a red border
  around the flag; there are seven yellow five-pointed stars with three
  centered in the top red border, three centered in the bottom red
  border, and one on a red disk superimposed at the center of the flag;
  there is also a symbolic nutmeg pod on the hoist-side triangle
  (Grenada is the world's second-largest producer of nutmeg, after
  Indonesia); the seven stars represent the seven administrative
  divisions

@Grenada, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is essentially agricultural and centers on the traditional
  production of spices and tropical plants. Agriculture accounts for
  about 15% of GDP and 80% of exports and employs 24% of the labor
  force. Tourism is the leading foreign exchange earner, followed by
  agricultural exports. Manufacturing remains relatively undeveloped,
  but is expected to grow, given a more favorable private investment
  climate since 1983. The economy achieved an impressive average annual
  growth rate of 5.5% in 1986-91 but stalled in 1992. Unemployment
  remains high at about 25%.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $250 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.4% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.6% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  25% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $78 million 
expenditures: 
  $51 million, including capital expenditures of $22 million (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $19.9 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, fruit and vegetables, clothing, mace
partners: 
  Netherlands, UK, Trinidad and Tobago, United States
Imports: 
  $103.2 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  food 25%, manufactured goods 22%, machinery 20%, chemicals 10%, fuel
  6% (1989)
partners: 
  US 29%, UK, Trinidad and Tobago, Japan, Canada (1989)
External debt: 
  $109 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.8% (1992 est.); accounts for 9% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  12,500 kW
production: 
  26 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  310 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food and beverage, textile, light assembly operations, tourism,
  construction
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 15% of GDP and 80% of exports; bananas, cocoa, nutmeg,
  and mace account for two-thirds of total crop production; world's
  second-largest producer and fourth-largest exporter of nutmeg and
  mace; small-size farms predominate, growing a variety of citrus
  fruits, avocados, root crops, sugarcane, corn, and vegetables
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY84-89), $60 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $70
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $32 million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Grenada, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,000 km 
paved: 
  600 km 
unpaved: 
  otherwise improved 300 km; unimproved earth 100 km 
Ports: 
  Saint George's
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  automatic, islandwide telephone system with 5,650 telephones; new SHF
  radio links to the islands of Trinidad, Tobago and Saint Vincent; VHF
  and UHF radio links to the islands of Trinidad and Carriacou;
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, 1 TV

@Grenada, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Grenada Police Force, Coast Guard 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Guadeloupe

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas department of France) 

@Guadeloupe, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the Caribbean Sea, 500 km southeast of Puerto Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,780 sq km 
land area: 
  1,760 sq km 
comparative area: 
  10 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  306 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical tempered by trade winds; relatively high humidity
Terrain: 
  Basse-Terre is volcanic in origin with interior mountains; Grand-Terre
  is low limestone formation
Natural resources: 
  cultivable land, beaches and climate that foster tourism 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  18% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  13% 
forest and woodland: 
  40% 
other: 
  24% 
Irrigated land: 
  30 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes (June to October); La Soufriere is an active
  volcano
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Guadeloupe, People

Population: 
  428,947 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.55% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  17.68 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.94 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.97 years 
male: 
  73.91 years 
female: 
  80.14 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.04 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Guadeloupian(s) 
adjective: 
  Guadeloupe 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black or mulatto 90%, white 5%, East Indian, Lebanese, Chinese less
  than 5%
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95%, Hindu and pagan African 5% 
Languages: 
  French, creole patois 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1982)
total population: 
  90% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  91% 
Labor force: 
  120,000 
by occupation: 
  services, government, and commerce 53.0%, industry 25.8%, agriculture
  21.2%

@Guadeloupe, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Department of Guadeloupe 
conventional short form: 
  Guadeloupe 
local long form: 
  Departement de la Guadeloupe 
local short form: 
  Guadeloupe 
Digraph: 
  GP
Type: 
  overseas department of France 
Capital: 
  Basse-Terre 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Independence: 
  none (overseas department of France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French legal system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  Prefect Franck PERRIEZ (since NA 1992); President of the General
  Council Dominique LARIFA (since NA); President of the Regional Council
  Lucette MICHAUX-CHEVRY (since 22 March 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral General Council and unicameral Regional Council
General Council: 
  elections last held NA March 1992 (next to be held by NA 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (43 total) FRUI.G 13,
  RPR/DUD 13, PPDG 8, FGPS 3, PCG 3 UPLG 1, PSG 1, independent 1
Regional Council: 
  elections last held on 31 January 1993 (next to be held by 16 March
  1998); results - RPR/DUD 48.30%, FGPS 17.09%, FRUI.G 7.44%, PPDG
  8.90%, UPLG 7.75% PCG 6.05%; seats - (41 total) seats by party NA
French Senate: 
  elections last held in September 1986 (next to be held September
  1995); Guadeloupe elects two representatives; results - percent of
  vote by party NA; seats - (2 total) PCG 1, PS 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held on 21 and 28 March1993 (next to be held March
  1998); Guadeloupe elects four representatives; results - percent of
  vote by party NA; seats - (4 total) PS 1, RPR 1, PCG 1, independent 1
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal (Cour d'Appel) with jurisdiction over Guadeloupe,
  French Guiana, and Martinique
Political parties and leaders: 
  Rally for the Republic (RPR), Aldo BLAISE; Communist Party of
  Guadeloupe (PCG), Christian Medard CELESTE; Socialist Party (FGPS),
  Georges LOUISOR; Popular Union for the Liberation of Guadeloupe
  (UPLG), Lucien PERATIN; FGPS Dissidents (FRUI.G); Union for French
  Democracy (UDF), Simon BARLAGNE; Union for the Center Rally (URC;
  coalition of the FGPS, RPR, and UDF); Guadeloupe Objective (OG),
  Lucette MICHAUX-CHEVRY; Progressive Democratic Party (PPDG), Henri
  BANGOU
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Popular Union for the Liberation of Guadeloupe (UPLG); Popular
  Movement for Independent Guadeloupe (MPGI); General Union of
  Guadeloupe Workers (UGTG); General Federation of Guadeloupe Workers
  (CGT-G); Christian Movement for the Liberation of Guadeloupe (KLPG)
Member of: 
  FZ, WCL, WFTU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas department of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@Guadeloupe, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy depends on agriculture, tourism, light industry, and
  services. It is also dependent upon France for large subsidies and
  imports. Tourism is a key industry, with most tourists from the US. In
  addition, an increasingly large number of cruise ships visit the
  islands. The traditionally important sugarcane crop is slowly being
  replaced by other crops, such as bananas (which now supply about 50%
  of export earnings), eggplant, and flowers. Other vegetables and root
  crops are cultivated for local consumption, although Guadeloupe is
  still dependent on imported food, which comes mainly from France.
  Light industry consists mostly of sugar and rum production. Most
  manufactured goods and fuel are imported. Unemployment is especially
  high among the young.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $2.9 billion (1991)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $8,400 (1991)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.7% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  31.3% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $333 million 
expenditures: 
  $671 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1989)
Exports: 
  $168 million (f.o.b., 1988)
commodities: 
  bananas, sugar, rum
partners: 
  France 68%, Martinique 22% (1987)
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (c.i.f., 1988)
commodities: 
  vehicles, foodstuffs, clothing and other consumer goods, construction
  materials, petroleum products
partners: 
  France 64%, Italy, FRG, US (1987)
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  171,500 kW
production: 
  441 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,080 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  construction, cement, rum, sugar, tourism
Agriculture: 
  cash crops - bananas, sugarcane; other products include tropical
  fruits and vegetables; livestock - cattle, pigs, goats; not
  self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-88), $4 million;  Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $8.235 billion 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Guadeloupe, Communications

Railroads: 
  privately owned, narrow-gauge plantation lines
Highways: 
total: 
  1,940 km 
paved: 
  1,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 340 km 
Ports: 
  Pointe-a-Pitre, Basse-Terre
Airports: 
total: 
  9 
usable: 
  9 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  8 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic facilities inadequate; 57,300 telephones; interisland
  microwave radio relay to Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, and
  Martinique; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 8 FM (30 private stations
  licensed to broadcast FM), 9 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT ground
  station

@Guadeloupe, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  French Forces, Gendarmerie 
Note: 
  defense is responsibility of France


@Guam

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Guam, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 5,955 km
  west-southwest of Honolulu, about three-quarters of the way between
  Hawaii and the Philippines
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  541.3 sq km 
land area: 
  541.3 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than three times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  125.5 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; generally warm and humid, moderated by northeast
  trade winds; dry season from January to June, rainy season from July
  to December; little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  volcanic origin, surrounded by coral reefs; relatively flat coraline
  limestone plateau (source of most fresh water) with steep coastal
  cliffs and narrow coastal plains in north, low-rising hills in center,
  mountains in south
Natural resources: 
  fishing (largely undeveloped), tourism (especially from Japan) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  11% 
permanent crops: 
  11% 
meadows and pastures: 
  15% 
forest and woodland: 
  18% 
other: 
  45% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  frequent squalls during rainy season; subject to relatively rare, but
  potentially very destructive typhoons (especially in August)
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  largest and southernmost island in the Mariana Islands archipelago;
  strategic location in western North Pacific Ocean

@Guam, People

Population: 
  149,620 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.48% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.66 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  3.86 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  15.17 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.29 years 
male: 
  72.42 years 
female: 
  76.13 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.39 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Guamanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Guamanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chamorro 47%, Filipino 25%, Caucasian 10%, Chinese, Japanese, Korean,
  and other 18% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 98%, other 2% 
Languages: 
  English, Chamorro, Japanese 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  96% 
male: 
  96% 
female: 
  96% 
Labor force: 
  46,930 (1990)
by occupation: 
  federal and territorial government 40%, private 60% (trade 18%,
  services 15.6%, construction 13.8%, other 12.6%) (1990)

@Guam, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of Guam 
conventional short form: 
  Guam 
Digraph: 
  GQ
Type: 
  organized, unincorporated territory of the US with policy relations
  between Guam and the US under the jurisdiction of the Office of
  Territorial and International Affairs, US Department of the Interior 
Capital: 
  Agana 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of the US)
Independence: 
  none (territory of the US)
National holiday: 
  Guam Discovery Day (first Monday in March) (1521); Liberation Day, 21
  July 
Constitution: 
  Organic Act of 1 August 1950
Legal system: 
  modeled on US; federal laws apply
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal; US citizens, but do not vote in US
  presidential elections
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January 1993); Vice
  President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993) 
head of government: 
  Governor Joseph A. ADA (since November 1986); Lieutenant Governor
  Frank F. BLAS (since NA); election last held on 6 November 1990 (next
  to be held NA November 1994); results - Joseph F. ADA reelected
cabinet: 
  executive departments; heads appointed by the governor with the
  consent of the Guam legislature
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislature: 
  elections last held on 9 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (21 total)
  Democratic 14, Republican 7
US House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 9 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1994); Guam elects one delegate; results - Robert UNDERWOOD was
  elected as delegate; seats - (1 total) Democrat 1
Judicial branch: 
  Federal District Court, Territorial Superior Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Party (controls the legislature); Republican Party (party
  of the Governor)
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), IOC, SPC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of the US)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of the US)
Flag: 
  territorial flag is dark blue with a narrow red border on all four
  sides; centered is a red-bordered, pointed, vertical ellipse
  containing a beach scene, outrigger canoe with sail, and a palm tree
  with the word GUAM superimposed in bold red letters; US flag is the
  national flag

@Guam, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy depends mainly on US military spending and on revenues
  from tourism. Over the past 20 years the tourist industry has grown
  rapidly, creating a construction boom for new hotels and the expansion
  of older ones. Visitors numbered about 900,000 in 1992. The slowdown
  in Japanese economic growth has been reflected in less vigorous growth
  in the tourism sector. About 60% of the labor force works for the
  private sector and the rest for government. Most food and industrial
  goods are imported, with about 75% from the US. In early 1994, Guam
  faces the problem of building up the civilian economic sector to
  offset the impact of military downsizing.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $2 billion (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $14,000 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  2% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $525 million 
expenditures: 
  $395 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991)
Exports: 
  $34 million (f.o.b., 1984)
commodities: 
  mostly transshipments of refined petroleum products, construction
  materials, fish, food and beverage products
partners: 
  US 25%, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands 63%, other 12%
Imports: 
  $493 million (c.i.f., 1984)
commodities: 
  petroleum and petroleum products, food, manufactured goods
partners: 
  US 23%, Japan 19%, other 58%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  500,000 kW
production: 
  2.3 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  16,300 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  US military, tourism, construction, transshipment services, concrete
  products, printing and publishing, food processing, textiles
Agriculture: 
  relatively undeveloped with most food imported; fruits, vegetables,
  eggs, pork, poultry, beef, copra
Economic aid: 
  although Guam receives no foreign aid, it does receive large transfer
  payments from the general revenues of the US Federal Treasury into
  which Guamanians pay no income or excise taxes; under the provisions
  of a special law of Congress, the Guamanian Treasury, rather than the
  US Treasury, receives federal income taxes paid by military and
  civilian Federal employees stationed in Guam
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Guam, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  674 km (all-weather roads)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Apra Harbor
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,200-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  26,317 telephones (1989); broadcast stations - 3 AM, 3 FM, 3 TV; 2
  Pacific Ocean INTELSAT ground stations

@Guam, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Guatemala, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, between Honduras and Mexico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  108,890 sq km 
land area: 
  108,430 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Tennessee
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,687 km, Belize 266 km, El Salvador 203 km, Honduras 256 km,
  Mexico 962 km 
Coastline: 
  400 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  the outer edge of the continental shelf
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime border with Belize in dispute; desultory negotiations to
  resolve the dispute have begun
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid in lowlands; cooler in highlands
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with narrow coastal plains and rolling limestone
  plateau (Peten)
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, nickel, rare woods, fish, chicle 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  12% 
forest and woodland: 
  40% 
other: 
  32% 
Irrigated land: 
  780 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution
natural hazards: 
  numerous volcanoes in mountains, with frequent violent earthquakes;
  Caribbean coast subject to hurricanes and other tropical storms
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  no natural harbors on west coast

@Guatemala, People

Population: 
  10,721,387 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.58% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  35.42 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.53 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.11 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  53.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  64.42 years 
male: 
  61.86 years 
female: 
  67.1 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.76 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Guatemalan(s) 
adjective: 
  Guatemalan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Ladino 56% (mestizo - mixed Indian and European ancestry), Indian 44% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic, Protestant, traditional Mayan 
Languages: 
  Spanish 60%, Indian language 40% (18 Indian dialects, including
  Quiche, Cakchiquel, Kekchi)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  55% 
male: 
  63% 
female: 
  47% 
Labor force: 
  2.5 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 60%, services 13%, manufacturing 12%, commerce 7%,
  construction 4%, transport 3%, utilities 0.7%, mining 0.3% (1985)

@Guatemala, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Guatemala 
conventional short form: 
  Guatemala 
local long form: 
  Republica de Guatemala 
local short form: 
  Guatemala 
Digraph: 
  GT
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Guatemala 
Administrative divisions: 
  22 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Alta Verapaz,
  Baja Verapaz, Chimaltenango, Chiquimula, El Progreso, Escuintla,
  Guatemala, Huehuetenango, Izabal, Jalapa, Jutiapa, Peten,
  Quetzaltenango, Quiche, Retalhuleu, Sacatepequez, San Marcos, Santa
  Rosa, Solola, Suchitepequez, Totonicapan, Zacapa
Independence: 
  15 September 1821 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 15 September (1821) 
Constitution: 
  31 May 1985, effective 14 January 1986
note: 
  suspended on 25 May 1993 by President SERRANO; reinstated on 5 June
  1993 following ouster of president
Legal system: 
  civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Ramiro DE LEON Carpio (since 6 June 1993); Vice President
  Arturo HERBRUGER (since 18 June 1993); election runoff held on 11
  January 1991 (next to be held 11 November 1995); results - Jorge
  SERRANO Elias (MAS) 68.1%, Jorge CARPIO Nicolle (UCN) 31.9%
note: 
  President SERRANO resigned on 1 June 1993 shortly after dissolving
  Congress and the judiciary; on 6 June 1993, Ramiro DE LEON Carpio was
  chosen as the new president by a vote of Congress; he will finish off
  the remainder of SERRANO's five-year term which expires in 1995
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; named by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Congress of the Republic (Congreso de la Republica): 
  last held on 11 November 1990 (next to be held 11 November 1995);
  results - UCN 25.6%, MAS 24.3%, DCG 17.5%, PAN 17.3%, MLN 4.8%,
  PSD/AP-5 3.6%, PR 2.1%; seats - (116 total) UCN 38, DCG 27, MAS 18,
  PAN 12, Pro-Rios Montt 10, MLN 4, PR 1, PSD/AP-5 1, independent 5
note: 
  by agreement of 11 November 1993, a special election is to be held in
  mid-1994 to elect a new congress
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Centrist Union (UCN), (vacant); Solidarity Action Movement
  (MAS), Oliverio GARCIA Rodas; Christian Democratic Party (DCG),
  Alfonso CABRERA Hidalgo; National Advancement Party (PAN), Alvaro ARZU
  Irigoyen; National Liberation Movement (MLN), Mario SANDOVAL Alarcon;
  Social Democratic Party (PSD), Mario SOLARZANO Martinez; Popular
  Alliance 5 (AP-5), Max ORLANDO Molina; Revolutionary Party (PR),
  Carlos CHAVARRIA Perez; National Authentic Center (CAN), Hector MAYORA
  Dawe; Democratic Institutional Party (PID), Oscar RIVAS; Nationalist
  United Front (FUN), Gabriel GIRON; Guatemalan Republican Front (FRG),
  Efrain RIOS Montt
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Coordinating Comittee of Agricultural, Comercial, Industrial, and
  Financial Associations (CACIF); Mutual Support Group (GAM); Agrarian
  Owners Group (UNAGRO); Committee for Campesino Unity (CUC); leftist
  guerrilla movement known as Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union
  (URNG) has four main factions - Guerrilla army of the Poor (EGP);
  Revolutionary Organization of the People in Arms (ORPA); Rebel Armed
  Forces (FAR); Guatemalan Labor Party (PGT/O)
Member of: 
  BCIE, CACM, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-24, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edmond MULET Lesseur 
chancery: 
  2220 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 745-4952 through 4954 
FAX: 
  (202) 745-1908 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Marilyn McAFEE (since 28 May 1993) 
embassy: 
  7-01 Avenida de la Reforma, Zone 10, Guatemala City 
mailing address: 
  APO AA 34024 
telephone: 
  [502] (2) 31-15-41 
FAX: 
  [502] (2) 31-88-55 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of light blue (hoist side), white, and
  light blue with the coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat
  of arms includes a green and red quetzal (the national bird) and a
  scroll bearing the inscription LIBERTAD 15 DE SEPTIEMBRE DE 1821 (the
  original date of independence from Spain) all superimposed on a pair
  of crossed rifles and a pair of crossed swords and framed by a wreath

@Guatemala, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on family and corporate agriculture, which
  accounts for 26% of GDP, employs about 60% of the labor force, and
  supplies two-thirds of exports. Manufacturing, predominantly in
  private hands, accounts for about 18% of GDP and 12% of the labor
  force. In both 1990 and 1991, the economy grew by 3%, the fourth and
  fifth consecutive years of mild growth. In 1992 growth picked up to
  almost 5% as government policies favoring competition and foreign
  trade and investment took stronger hold. In 1993, despite political
  unrest, this momentum continued, foreign investment held up, and
  growth was estimated at 4%.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent- $31.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11.6% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  6.1%; underemployment 30%-40% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $604 million (1990)
expenditures: 
  $808 million, including capital expenditures of $134 million (1990)
Exports: 
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  coffee, sugar, bananas, cardamon, beef
partners: 
  US 37%, El Salvador, Costa Rica, Germany, Honduras
Imports: 
  $2.6 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  fuel and petroleum products, machinery, grain, fertilizers, motor
  vehicles
partners: 
  US 45%, Mexico, Venezuela, Japan, Germany
External debt: 
  $2.2 billion ( 1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.9% (1991 est.); accounts for 18% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  847,600 kW
production: 
  2.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  260 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  sugar, textiles and clothing, furniture, chemicals, petroleum, metals,
  rubber, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 26% of GDP; most important sector of economy; contributes
  two-thirds of export earnings; principal crops - sugarcane, corn,
  bananas, coffee, beans, cardamom; livestock - cattle, sheep, pigs,
  chickens; food importer
Illicit drugs: 
  transit country for cocaine shipments; illicit producer of opium poppy
  and cannabis for the international drug trade; the government has an
  active eradication program for cannabis and opium poppy
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $1.1 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $7.92
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 quetzal (Q) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  free market quetzales (Q) per US$1 - 5.8542 (January 1994), 5,6354
  (1993), 5.1706 (1992), 5.0289 (1991), 4.4858 (1990), 2.8161 (1989);
  note - black-market rate 2.800 (May 1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Guatemala, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,019 km 0.914-meter gauge, single track; 917 km government owned, 102
  km privately owned
Highways: 
total: 
  26,429 km 
paved: 
  2,868 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 11,421 km; unimproved earth 12,140 km 
Inland waterways: 
  260 km navigable year round; additional 730 km navigable during
  high-water season
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 275 km 
Ports: 
  Puerto Barrios, Puerto Quetzal, Santo Tomas de Castilla
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,129 GRT/6,450 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  523 
usable: 
  465 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  20 
Telecommunications: 
  fairly modern network centered in the city of Guatemala; 97,670
  telephones; broadcast stations - 91 AM, no FM, 25 TV, 15 shortwave;
  connection into Central American Microwave System; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Guatemala, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,491,582; fit for military service 1,629,222; reach
  military age (18) annually 119,545 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $121 million, 1% of GDP (1993)


@Guernsey

Header
Affiliation: 
  (British crown dependency) 

@Guernsey, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, in the English Channel, 52 km west of France between
  UK and France
Map references: 
  Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  194 sq km 
land area: 
  194 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Alderney, Guernsey, Herm, Sark, and some other smaller
  islands
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  50 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate with mild winters and cool summers; about 50% of days are
  overcast
Terrain: 
  mostly level with low hills in southwest
Natural resources: 
  cropland 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  large, deepwater harbor at Saint Peter Port

@Guernsey, People

Population: 
  63,719 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.01% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.21 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.97 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  6.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.15 years 
male: 
  75.45 years 
female: 
  80.88 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.68 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Channel Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Channel Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  UK and Norman-French descent
Religions: 
  Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist, Congregational,
  Methodist 
Languages: 
  English, French; Norman-French dialect spoken in country districts
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Guernsey, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Bailiwick of Guernsey 
conventional short form: 
  Guernsey 
Digraph: 
  GK
Type: 
  British crown dependency 
Capital: 
  Saint Peter Port 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (British crown dependency)
Independence: 
  none (British crown dependency)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 9 May (1945) 
Constitution: 
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and practice
Legal system: 
  English law and local statute; justice is administered by the Royal
  Court
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief Lt. Gen. Sir Michael
  WILKINS (since NA 1990); Bailiff Mr. Graham Martyn DOREY (since
  February 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Advisory and Finance Committee (other committees); appointed by the
  States
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Assembly of the States: 
  elections last held NA (next to be held NA); results - no percent of
  vote by party since all are independents; seats - (60 total, 33
  elected), all independents
Judicial branch: 
  Royal Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none; all independents
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (British crown dependency)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (British crown dependency)
Flag: 
  white with the red cross of Saint George (patron saint of England)
  extending to the edges of the flag

@Guernsey, Economy

Overview: 
  Financial services account from more than 50% of total income.
  Tourism, manufacturing, and horticulture, mainly tomatoes and cut
  flowers, have been declining. Bank profits (1992) registered a record
  26% growth. Fund management and insurance are the two other major
  income generators.
National product: 
  GDP  $NA 
National product real growth rate: 
  9% (1987)
National product per capita: 
  $NA 
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1988)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $208.9 million 
expenditures: 
  $173.9 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988)
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  tomatoes, flowers and ferns, sweet peppers, eggplant, other vegetables
partners: 
  UK (regarded as internal trade)
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  coal, gasoline, and oil
partners: 
  UK (regarded as internal trade)
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  173,000 kW
production: 
  525 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  9,060 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, banking
Agriculture: 
  tomatoes, flowers (mostly grown in greenhouses), sweet peppers,
  eggplant, other vegetables, fruit; Guernsey cattle
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Guernsey (#G) pound = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Guernsey pounds (#G) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6658 (1993),
  0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989); note - the
  Guernsey pound is at par with the British pound
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Guernsey, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Saint Peter Port, Saint Sampson
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 41,900 telephones; 1 submarine
  cable

@Guernsey, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Guinea, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between
  Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  245,860 sq km 
land area: 
  245,860 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Oregon
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,399 km, Guinea-Bissau 386 km, Cote d'Ivoire 610 km, Liberia
  563 km, Mali 858 km, Senegal 330 km, Sierra Leone 652 km 
Coastline: 
  320 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy season (June to
  November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December to May) with
  northeasterly harmattan winds
Terrain: 
  generally flat coastal plain, hilly to mountainous interior
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, iron ore, diamonds, gold, uranium, hydropower, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  12% 
forest and woodland: 
  42% 
other: 
  40% 
Irrigated land: 
  240 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; inadequate supplies of safe drinking water;
  desertification; soil contamination and erosion
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dusty harmattan haze may reduce visibility during dry season
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

@Guinea, People

Population: 
  6,391,536 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.45% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  44.08 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  19.6 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  139.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  44.13 years 
male: 
  41.9 years 
female: 
  46.43 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.85 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Guinean(s) 
adjective: 
  Guinean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Peuhl 40%, Malinke 30%, Soussou 20%, indigenous tribes 10% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 85%, Christian 8%, indigenous beliefs 7% 
Languages: 
  French (official); each tribe has its own language
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  24% 
male: 
  35% 
female: 
  13% 
Labor force: 
  2.4 million (1983)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 82.0%, industry and commerce 11.0%, services 5.4%
note: 
  88,112 civil servants (1987); 52% of population of working age (1985)

@Guinea, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Guinea 
conventional short form: 
  Guinea 
local long form: 
  Republique de Guinee 
local short form: 
  Guinee 
former: 
  French Guinea 
Digraph: 
  GV
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Conakry 
Administrative divisions: 
  33 administrative regions (regions administratives, singular - region
  administrative); Beyla, Boffa, Boke, Conakry, Coyah, Dabola, Dalaba,
  Dinguiraye, Faranah, Forecariah, Fria, Gaoual, Gueckedou, Kankan,
  Kerouane, Kindia, Kissidougou, Koubia, Koundara, Kouroussa, Labe,
  Lelouma, Lola, Macenta, Mali, Mamou, Mandiana, Nzerekore, Pita,
  Siguiri, Telimele, Tougue, Yomou
Independence: 
  2 October 1958 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Second Republic, 3 April (1984) 
Constitution: 
  23 December 1990 (Loi Fundamentale)
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system, customary law, and decree; legal
  codes currently being revised; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Lansana CONTE, elected in the first multi-party election 19
  December 1993 prior to the election he had ruled as head of military
  government since 5 April 1984
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
People's National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale Populaire): 
  the People's National Assembly was dissolved after the 3 April 1984
  coup; framework established in December 1991 for a new National
  Assembly with 114 seats; legislative elections are scheduled for 1994
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal (Cour d'Appel) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  political parties were legalized on 1 April 1992
pro-government: 
  Party for Unity and Progress (PUP)
other: 
  Rally for the Guinean People (RPG), Alpha CONDE; Union for a New
  Republic (UNR), Mamadou BAH; Party for Renewal and Progress (PRP),
  Siradiou DIALLO
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO (observer), ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD,
  ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Elhadj Boubacar BARRY 
chancery: 
  2112 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-9420 
FAX: 
  (202) 483-8688 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Joseph A. SALOOM 
embassy: 
  2nd Boulevard and 9th Avenue, Conakry 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 603, Conakry 
telephone: 
  (224) 44-15-20 through 24 
FAX: 
  (224) 44-15-22 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side), yellow, and green;
  uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the flag
  of Rwanda, which has a large black letter R centered in the yellow
  band

@Guinea, Economy

Overview: 
  Although possessing major mineral and hydropower resources and
  considerable potential for agricultural development, Guinea remains
  one of the poorest countries in the world. The agricultural sector
  contributes about 40% to GDP and employs more than 80% of the work
  force, while industry accounts for 27% of GDP. Guinea possesses over
  25% of the world's bauxite reserves. The mining sector accounted for
  85% of exports in 1991. Long-run improvements in literacy, financial
  institutions, and the legal framework are needed if the country is to
  move out of poverty. Except in the bauxite industry, foreign
  investment remains minimal.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3.1 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.2% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  16.6% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $449 million 
expenditures: 
  $708 million, including capital expenditures of $361 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $622 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  bauxite, alumina, diamonds, gold, coffee, pineapples, bananas, palm
  kernels
partners: 
  US 23%, Belgium 12%, Ireland 12%, Spain 12%
Imports: 
  $768 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum products, metals, machinery, transport equipment,
  foodstuffs, textiles, and other grain
partners: 
  France 26%, Cote d'Ivoire 12%, Hong Kong 6%, Germany 6%
External debt: 
  2.5 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for 27% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  113,000 kW
production: 
  300 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  40 kWh (1989)
Industries: 
  bauxite mining, alumina, gold, diamond mining, light manufacturing and
  agricultural processing industries
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 40% of GDP (includes fishing and forestry); mostly
  subsistence farming; principal products - rice, coffee, pineapples,
  palm kernels, cassava, bananas, sweet potatoes, timber; livestock -
  cattle, sheep and goats; not self-sufficient in food grains
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $227 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $1.465 billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $120 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $446 million 
Currency: 
  1 Guinean franc (FG) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Guinean francs (FG) per US$1 - 810.94 (1 July 1993), 922.9 (30
  September 1992), 675 (1990), 618 (1989), 515 (1988), 440 (1987), 383
  (1986)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Guinea, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,045 km; 806 km 1.000-meter gauge, 239 km 1.435-meter standard gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  30,100 km 
paved: 
  1,145 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 12,955 km (of which barely 4,500 are currently
  all-weather roads); unimproved earth 16,000 km (1987)
Inland waterways: 
  1,295 km navigable by shallow-draft native craft
Ports: 
  Conakry, Kamsar
Airports: 
total: 
  15 
usable: 
  15 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  10 
Telecommunications: 
  poor to fair system of open-wire lines, small radiocommunication
  stations, and new radio relay system; 15,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 3 AM 1 FM, 1 TV; 65,000 TV sets; 200,000 radio receivers; 1
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Guinea, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (acts primarily as a coast guard), Air Force, Presidential
  Guard, Republican Guard, paramilitary National Gendarmerie, National
  Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,440,297; fit for military service 726,543 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $29 million, 1.2% of GDP (1988)


@Guinea-Bissau, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Guinea and
  Senegal
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  36,120 sq km 
land area: 
  28,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three times the size of Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  total 724 km, Guinea 386 km, Senegal 338 km 
Coastline: 
  350 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Guinea-Bissau and Senegal signed an agreement resolving their maritime
  boundary in 1993
Climate: 
  tropical; generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy season (June
  to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December to May)
  with northeasterly harmattan winds
Terrain: 
  mostly low coastal plain rising to savanna in east
Natural resources: 
  unexploited deposits of petroleum, bauxite, phosphates, fish, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  11% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  43% 
forest and woodland: 
  38% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; overgrazing
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dusty harmattan haze may reduce visibility during dry
  season; brush fires
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Wetlands; signed, but not ratifed - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Guinea-Bissau, People

Population: 
  1,098,231 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.37% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  40.75 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  17.03 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  120 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  47.44 years 
male: 
  45.79 years 
female: 
  49.15 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.51 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Guinea-Bissauan(s) 
adjective: 
  Guinea-Bissauan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 99% (Balanta 30%, Fula 20%, Manjaca 14%, Mandinga 13%, Papel
  7%), European and mulatto less than 1%
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 65%, Muslim 30%, Christian 5% 
Languages: 
  Portuguese (official), Criolo, African languages 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  36% 
male: 
  50% 
female: 
  24% 
Labor force: 
  403,000 (est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 90%, industry, services, and commerce 5%, government 5%
note: 
  population of working age 53% (1983)

@Guinea-Bissau, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Guinea-Bissau 
conventional short form: 
  Guinea-Bissau 
local long form: 
  Republica de Guine-Bissau 
local short form: 
  Guine-Bissau 
former: 
  Portuguese Guinea 
Digraph: 
  PU
Type: 
  republic formerly highly centralized, multiparty since mid-1991
Capital: 
  Bissau 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 regions (regioes, singular - regiao); Bafata, Biombo, Bissau,
  Bolama, Cacheu, Gabu, Oio, Quinara, Tombali
Independence: 
  10 September 1974 (from Portugal)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 10 September (1974) 
Constitution: 
  16 May 1984, amended 4 May 1991 (currently undergoing revision to
  liberalize popular participation in the government)
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  15 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President of the Council of State Gen. Joao Bernardo VIEIRA (assumed
  power 14 November 1980 and was elected President of Council of State
  on 16 May 1984); election last held 19 June 1989 (next to be held 3
  July 1994); results - Gen. Joao Bernardo VIEIRA was reelected without
  opposition by the National People's Assembly
Council of State: 
  this body is elected by the National People's Assembly from among its
  own members to legislate between sessions of the National People's
  Assembly
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National People's Assembly: 
  (Assembleia Nacional Popular) elections last held 15 June 1989 (next
  to be held 3 July 1994); results - PAIGC was the only party; seats -
  (150 total) PAIGC 150
Judicial branch: 
  none; there is a Ministry of Justice in the Council of Ministers
Political parties and leaders: 
  African Party for the Independence of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde
  (PAIGC), President Joao Bernardo VIEIRA, leader; Democratic Social
  Front (FDS), Rafael BARBOSA, leader; Bafata Movement, Domingos
  Fernandes GARNER, leader; Democratic Front (FD), Aristides MENEZES,
  leader
note: 
  PAIGC is still the major party (of 10 parties) and controls all
  aspects of the government
Member of: 
  ACCT (associate), ACP, AfDB, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL,
  IOM (observer), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMOZ, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Alfredo Lopes CABRAL 
chancery: 
  918 16th Street NW, Mezzanine Suite, Washington, DC 20006 
telephone: 
  (202) 872-4222 
FAX: 
  (202) 872-4226 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Roger A. McGUIRE 
embassy: 
  Barrio de Penha, Bissau 
mailing address: 
  C.P. 297, 1067 Bissau Codex, Bissau, Guinea-Bissau 
telephone: 
  [245] 25-2273, 25-2274, 25-2275, 25-2276 
FAX: 
  [245] 25-2282 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and green with a vertical
  red band on the hoist side; there is a black five-pointed star
  centered in the red band; uses the popular pan-African colors of
  Ethiopia; similar to the flag of Cape Verde, which has the black star
  raised above the center of the red band and is framed by two corn
  stalks and a yellow clam shell

@Guinea-Bissau, Economy

Overview: 
  Guinea-Bissau ranks among the poorest countries in the world, with a
  per capita GDP of roughly $800. Agriculture and fishing are the main
  economic activities. Cashew nuts, peanuts, and palm kernels are the
  primary exports. Exploitation of known mineral deposits is unlikely at
  present because of a weak infrastructure and the high cost of
  development.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $860 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  55% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $33.6 million 
expenditures: 
  $44.8 million, including capital expenditures of $570,000 (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $20.4 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  cashews, fish, peanuts, palm kernels
partners: 
  Portugal, Spain, Senegal, India, Nigeria
Imports: 
  $63.5 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, transport equipment, petroleum products, machinery and
  equipment
partners: 
  Portugal, Netherlands, China, Germany, Senegal
External debt: 
  $462 million (December 1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0.1% (1991 est.); accounts for 5% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  22,000 kW
production: 
  30 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  30 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  agricultural processing, beer, soft drinks
Agriculture: 
  accounts for over 45% of GDP, nearly 100% of exports, and 90% of
  employment; rice is the staple food; other crops include corn, beans,
  cassava, cashew nuts, peanuts, palm kernels, and cotton; not
  self-sufficient in food; fishing and forestry potential not fully
  exploited
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $49 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $615
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $41 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $68 million 
Currency: 
  1 Guinea-Bissauan peso (PG) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Guinea-Bissauan pesos (PG) per US$1 - 11,850 (December 1993), 10,082
  (1993), 6,934 (1992), 3,659 (1991), 2,185 (1990), 1,810 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Guinea-Bissau, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  3,218 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 2,698 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 520 km 
Inland waterways: 
  scattered stretches are important to coastal commerce
Ports: 
  Bissau
Airports: 
total: 
  32 
usable: 
  16 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
Telecommunications: 
  poor system of radio relay, open-wire lines, and radiocommunications;
  3,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 3 FM, 1 TV

@Guinea-Bissau, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  People's Revolutionary Armed Force (FARP; including Army, Navy, Air
  Force), paramilitary force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 243,715; fit for military service 139,161 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $9.3 million, 5%-6% of GDP (1987)


@Guyana, Geography

Location: 
  Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between
  Suriname and Venezuela
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  214,970 sq km 
land area: 
  196,850 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Idaho
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,462 km, Brazil 1,119 km, Suriname 600 km, Venezuela 743 km 
Coastline: 
  459 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the outer edge of continental margin
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  all of the area west of the Essequibo River claimed by Venezuela;
  Suriname claims area between New (Upper Courantyne) and
  Courantyne/Kutari Rivers (all headwaters of the Courantyne)
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid, moderated by northeast trade winds; two rainy
  seasons (May to mid-August, mid-November to mid-January)
Terrain: 
  mostly rolling highlands; low coastal plain; savanna in south
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, gold, diamonds, hardwood timber, shrimp, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  83% 
other: 
  8% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,300 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from sewage and agricultural and industrial chemicals;
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  flash floods a constant threat during rainy seasons
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratifed - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change

@Guyana, People

Population: 
  729,425 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -0.75% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.95 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.36 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -20.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  48.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  64.9 years 
male: 
  61.66 years 
female: 
  68.3 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.29 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Guyanese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Guyanese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  East Indian 51%, black and mixed 43%, Amerindian 4%, European and
  Chinese 2% 
Religions: 
  Christian 57%, Hindu 33%, Muslim 9%, other 1% 
Languages: 
  English, Amerindian dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1990 est.)
total population: 
  95% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  96% 
Labor force: 
  268,000 
by occupation: 
  industry and commerce 44.5%, agriculture 33.8%, services 21.7%
note: 
  public-sector employment amounts to 60-80% of the total labor force
  (1985)

@Guyana, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
conventional short form: 
  Guyana 
former: 
  British Guiana 
Digraph: 
  GY
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Georgetown 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 regions; Barima-Waini, Cuyuni-Mazaruni, Demerara-Mahaica, East
  Berbice-Corentyne, Essequibo Islands-West Demerara, Mahaica-Berbice,
  Pomeroon-Supenaam, Potaro-Siparuni, Upper Demerara-Berbice, Upper
  Takutu-Upper Essequibo
Independence: 
  26 May 1966 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Republic Day, 23 February (1970) 
Constitution: 
  6 October 1980
Legal system: 
  based on English common law with certain admixtures of Roman-Dutch
  law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Executive President Cheddi JAGAN (since 5 October 1992); First Vice
  President Sam HINDS (since 5 October 1992); election last held on 5
  October 1992; results - Cheddi JAGAN was elected president since he
  was leader of the party with the most votes in the National Assembly
  elections
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Sam HINDS (since 5 October 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet of Ministers; appointed by the president, responsible to the
  legislature
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections last held on 5 October 1992 (next to be held in 1997);
  results - PPP 53.4%, PNC 42.3%, WPA 2%, TUF 1.2%; seats - (65 total,
  53 elected) PPP 36, PNC 26, WPA 2, TUF 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Judicature 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's Progressive Party (PPP), Cheddi JAGAN; People's National
  Congress (PNC), Hugh Desmond HOYTE;; People's National Congress (PNC),
  Hugh Desmond HOYTE; Working People's Alliance (WPA), Eusi KWAYANA,
  Rupert ROOPNARINE; Democratic Labor Movement (DLM), Paul TENNASSEE;
  People's Democratic Movement (PDM), Llewellyn JOHN; National
  Democratic Front (NDF), Joseph BACCHUS; The United Force (TUF),
  Manzoor NADIR; United Republican Party (URP), Leslie RAMSAMMY;
  National Republican Party (NRP), Robert GANGADEEN; Guyana Labor Party
  (GLP), Nanda GOPAUL
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Trades Union Congress (TUC); Guyana Council of Indian Organizations
  (GCIO); Civil Liberties Action Committee (CLAC)
note: 
  the latter two organizations are small and active but not well
  organized
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user),
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, ONUSAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dr. Ali Odeen ISHMAEL 
chancery: 
  2490 Tracy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-6900 through 6903 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador George F. Jones 
embassy: 
  99-100 Young and Duke Streets, Kingstown, Georgetown 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 10507, Georgetown 
telephone: 
  [592] (2) 54900 through 54909 and 57960 through 57969 
FAX: 
  [592] (2) 58497 
Flag: 
  green with a red isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side)
  superimposed on a long yellow arrowhead; there is a narrow black
  border between the red and yellow, and a narrow white border between
  the yellow and the green

@Guyana, Economy

Overview: 
  Guyana, one of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere, has
  pushed ahead strongly in 1991-93, at 7% average annual growth rate.
  Favorable factors include recovery in the key agricultural and mining
  sectors, a more favorable atmosphere for business initiative, a more
  realistic exchange rate, a sharp drop in the inflation rate, and the
  continued support of international organizations. Serious underlying
  economic problems will continue. Electric power has been in short
  supply and constitutes a major barrier to future gains in national
  output. The government will have to persist in efforts to control
  external debt and inflation and to extend the privatization program.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  8.3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1993
Unemployment rate: 
  12% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $121 million 
expenditures: 
  $225 million, including capital expenditures of $50 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $400 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  sugar, bauxite/alumina, rice, shrimp, molasses
partners: 
  UK 33%, US 31%, Canada 9%, France 5%, Japan 3%, (1992)
Imports: 
  $520 million (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactures, machinery, petroleum, food
partners: 
  US 37%, Trinidad and Tobago 13%, UK 11%, Italy 8%, Japan 5% (1992)
External debt: 
  $1.9 billion including arrears (1992 est)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 11% (1991 est.); accounts for about 11% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  253,500 kW
production: 
  276 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  370 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  bauxite mining, sugar, rice milling, timber, fishing (shrimp),
  textiles, gold mining
Agriculture: 
  most important sector, accounting for 25% of GDP and about half of
  exports; sugar and rice are key crops; development potential exists
  for fishing and forestry; not self-sufficient in food, especially
  wheat, vegetable oils, and animal products
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $116 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $325
  million; Communist countries 1970-89, $242 million 
Currency: 
  1 Guyanese dollar (G$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Guyanese dollars (G$) per US$1 - 130.7 (January 1994), 126.7 (1993),
  125.0 (1992), 111.8 (1991), 39.533 (1990), 27.159 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Guyana, Communications

Railroads: 
  no public railroads; about 100 km of narrow gauge industrial railroads
  to transport minerals, including bauxite
Highways: 
total: 
  7,665 km 
paved: 
  550 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 5,000 km; earth 2,115 km 
Inland waterways: 
  6,000 km total of navigable waterways; Berbice, Demerara, and
  Essequibo Rivers are navigable by oceangoing vessels for 150 km, 100
  km, and 80 km, respectively
Ports: 
  Georgetown, New Amsterdam
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,317 GRT/2,558 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  53 
usable: 
  48 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  12 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system with radio relay network; over 27,000 telephones;
  tropospheric scatter link to Trinidad; broadcast stations - 4 AM, 3
  FM, no TV, 1 shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Guyana, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Guyana Defense Force (GDF; including the Ground Forces, Coast Guard
  and Air Corps), Guyana People's Militia (GPM), Guyana National Service
  (GNS) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 197,802; fit for military service 150,072 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Haiti, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the northern Caribbean Sea, about 90 km southeast of
  Cuba
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  27,750 sq km 
land area: 
  27,560 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 275 km, Dominican Republic 275 km 
Coastline: 
  1,771 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims US-administered Navassa Island
Climate: 
  tropical; semiarid where mountains in east cut off trade winds
Terrain: 
  mostly rough and mountainous
Natural resources: 
  bauxite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  13% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  45% 
Irrigated land: 
  750 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  lies in the middle of the hurricane belt and subject to severe storms
  from June to October; occasional flooding and earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  shares island of Hispaniola with Dominican Republic (western one-third
  is Haiti, eastern two-thirds is the Dominican Republic)

@Haiti, People

Population: 
  6,491,450 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.63% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  39.72 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.78 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -4.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  108.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  45.11 years 
male: 
  43.45 years 
female: 
  46.85 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.94 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Haitian(s) 
adjective: 
  Haitian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 95%, mulatto and European 5% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 80% (of which an overwhelming majority also practice
  Voodoo), Protestant 16% (Baptist 10%, Pentecostal 4%, Adventist 1%,
  other 1%), none 1%, other 3% (1982)
Languages: 
  French (official) 10%, Creole 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  53% 
male: 
  59% 
female: 
  47% 
Labor force: 
  2.3 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 66%, services 25%, industry 9%
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor, unskilled labor abundant (1982)

@Haiti, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Haiti 
conventional short form: 
  Haiti 
local long form: 
  Republique d'Haiti 
local short form: 
  Haiti 
Digraph: 
  HA
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Port-au-Prince 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 departments, (departements, singular - departement); Artibonite,
  Centre, Grand'Anse, Nord, Nord-Est, Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Est
Independence: 
  1 January 1804 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 January (1804) 
Constitution: 
  constitution approved March 1987, suspended June 1988, most articles
  reinstated March 1989; October 1991, government claims to be observing
  the Constitution
Legal system: 
  based on Roman civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE (since 7 February 1991), ousted in a
  coup in September 1991, but still recognized by international
  community as Chief of State; election last held 16 December 1990 (next
  to be held by December 1995); results - Rev. Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE
  67.5%, Marc BAZIN 14.2%, Louis DEJOIE 4.9%
head of government: 
  acting Prime Minister Robert MALVAL (since August 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; chosen by prime minister in consultation with the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale)
Senate: 
  elections last held 18 January 1993, widely condemned as illegitimate
  (next to be held December 1994); results - percent of vote NA; seats -
  (27 total) FNCD 12, ANDP 8, PAIN 2, MRN 1, RDNP 1, PNT 1, independent
  2
Chamber of Deputies: 
  elections last held 16 December 1990, with runoff held 20 January 1991
  (next to be held by December 1994); results - percent of vote NA;
  seats - (83 total) FNCD 27, ANDP 17, PDCH 7, PAIN 6, RDNP 6, MDN 5,
  PNT 3, MKN 2, MODELH 2, MRN 1, independents 5, other 2
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal (Cour de Cassation) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Front for Change and Democracy (FNCD), including National
  Congress of Democratic Movements (CONACOM), Victor BENOIT, and
  National Cooperative Action Movement (MKN), Volvick Remy JOSEPH;
  Movement for the Installation of Democracy in Haiti (MIDH), Marc
  BAZIN; National Progressive Revolutionary Party (PANPRA), Serge
  GILLES; National Patriotic Movement of November 28 (MNP-28), Dejean
  BELIZAIRE; National Agricultural and Industrial Party (PAIN), Louis
  DEJOIE; Movement for National Reconstruction (MRN), Rene THEODORE;
  Haitian Christian Democratic Party (PDCH), Joseph DOUZE; Assembly of
  Progressive National Democrats (RDNP), Leslie MANIGAT; National Party
  of Labor (PNT), Thomas DESULME; Mobilization for National Development
  (MDN), Hubert DE RONCERAY; Democratic Movement for the Liberation of
  Haiti (MODELH), Francois LATORTUE; Haitian Social Christian Party
  (PSCH), Gregoire EUGENE; Movement for the Organization of the Country
  (MOP), Gesner COMEAU and Jean MOLIERE
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Democratic Unity Confederation (KID); Roman Catholic Church;
  Confederation of Haitian Workers (CTH); Federation of Workers Trade
  Unions (FOS); Autonomous Haitian Workers (CATH); National Popular
  Assembly (APN); Revolutionary Front for Haitian Advancement and
  Progress (FRAPH)
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, CARICOM (observer), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ITU, LAES, LORCS, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jean CASIMIR 
chancery: 
  2311 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-4090 through 4092 
FAX: 
  (202) 745-7215 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Miami, New York, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William Lacy SWING 
embassy: 
  Harry Truman Boulevard, Port-au-Prince 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1761, Port-au-Prince 
telephone: 
  [509] 22-0354, 22-0368, 22-0200, or 22-0612 
FAX: 
  [509] 23-1641 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with a centered white
  rectangle bearing the coat of arms, which contains a palm tree flanked
  by flags and two cannons above a scroll bearing the motto L'UNION FAIT
  LA FORCE (Union Makes Strength)

@Haiti, Economy

Overview: 
  About 75% of the population live in abject poverty. Agriculture is
  mainly small-scale subsistence farming and employs nearly
  three-fourths of the work force. The majority of the population does
  not have ready access to safe drinking water, adequate medical care,
  or sufficient food. Few social assistance programs exist, and the lack
  of employment opportunities remains one of the most critical problems
  facing the economy, along with soil erosion and political instability.
  Trade sanctions applied by the Organization of American States in
  response to the September 1991 coup against President ARISTIDE have
  further damaged the economy. Output continued to drop in 1993 although
  not as sharply as in 1992.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $5.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -13% (FY92 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  20% (FY92 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  25%-50% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $300 million 
expenditures: 
  $416 million, including capital expenditures of $145 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $135 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  light manufactures 65%, coffee 19%, other agriculture 8%, other 8%
partners: 
  US 84%, Italy 4%, France 3%, other industrial countries 6%, less
  developed countries 3% (1987)
Imports: 
  $423 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machines and manufactures 34%, food and beverages 22%, petroleum
  products 14%, chemicals 10%, fats and oils 9%
partners: 
  US 64%, Netherlands Antilles 5%, Japan 5%, France 4%, Canada 3%,
  Germany 3% (1987)
External debt: 
  $838 million (December 1990)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2% (1991 est.); accounts for 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  217,000 kW
production: 
  480 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  75 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  sugar refining, textiles, flour milling, cement manufacturing,
  tourism, light assembly industries based on imported parts
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 28% of GDP and employs around 70% of work force; mostly
  small-scale subsistence farms; commercial crops - coffee, mangoes,
  sugarcane, wood; staple crops - rice, corn, sorghum; shortage of wheat
  flour
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana en route to the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (1970-89), $700 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $770
  million 
Currency: 
  1 gourde (G) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  gourdes (G) per US$1 - 12.00 (1 July 1993), 8.4 (December 1991), fixed
  rate of 5.000 through second quarter of 1991
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Haiti, Communications

Railroads: 
  40 km 0.760-meter narrow gauge, single-track, privately owned
  industrial line
Highways: 
total: 
  4,000 km 
paved: 
  950 km 
unpaved: 
  otherwise improved 900 km; unimproved earth 2,150 km 
Inland waterways: 
  negligible; less than 100 km navigable
Ports: 
  Port-au-Prince, Cap-Haitien; six minor ports
Airports: 
total: 
  14 
usable: 
  11 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic facilities barely adequate, international facilities slightly
  better; 36,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 33 AM, no FM, 4 TV, 2
  shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Haiti, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (including Police), Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,313,265; fit for military service 709,712; reach
  military age (18) annually 62,488 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $34 million, 1.5% of GDP (1988 est.)


@Heard Island and McDonald Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Australia) 

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the Indian Ocean, 4,100 km southwest of Australia
Map references: 
  Antarctic Region 
Area: 
total area: 
  412 sq km 
land area: 
  412 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  101.9 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  antarctic
Terrain: 
  Heard Island - bleak and mountainous, with an quiescent volcano;
  McDonald Islands - small and rocky
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  primarily used for research stations

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
Digraph: 
  HM
Type: 
  territory of Australia administered by the Ministry for Environment,
  Sport, and Territories
Capital: 
  none; administered from Canberra, Australia
Independence: 
  none (territory of Australia)

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only

@Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Australia


@Holy See (Vatican City), Geography

Location: 
  Southern Europe, an enclave of Rome - central Italy
Map references: 
  Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  0.44 sq km 
land area: 
  0.44 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 3.2 km, Italy 3.2 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; mild, rainy winters (September to mid-May) with hot, dry
  summers (May to September)
Terrain: 
  low hill
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution, Environmental Modification
Note: 
  urban; landlocked; enclave of Rome, Italy; world's smallest state;
  outside the Vatican City, 13 buildings in Rome and Castel Gandolfo
  (the pope's summer residence) enjoy extraterritorial rights

@Holy See (Vatican City), People

Population: 
  821 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.15% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  NA
Death rate: 
  NA
Net migration rate: 
  NA
Infant mortality rate: 
  NA
Life expectancy at birth: 
  NA
Total fertility rate: 
  NA
Nationality: 
noun: 
  none 
adjective: 
  none 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Italians, Swiss 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  Italian, Latin, various other languages 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA 
by occupation: 
  dignitaries, priests, nuns, guards, and 3,000 lay workers who live
  outside the Vatican

@Holy See (Vatican City), Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  The Holy See (State of the Vatican City) 
conventional short form: 
  Holy See (Vatican City) 
local long form: 
  Santa Sede (Stato della Citta del Vaticano) 
local short form: 
  Santa Sede (Citta del Vaticano) 
Digraph: 
  VT
Type: 
  monarchical-sacerdotal state 
Capital: 
  Vatican City 
Independence: 
  11 February 1929 (from Italy)
National holiday: 
  Installation Day of the Pope, 22 October (1978) (John Paul II) 
note: 
  Pope John Paul II was elected on 16 October 1978
Constitution: 
  Apostolic Constitution of 1967 (effective 1 March 1968)
Legal system: 
  NA 
Suffrage: 
  limited to cardinals less than 80 years old
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Pope JOHN PAUL II (Karol WOJTYLA; since 16 October 1978); election
  last held 16 October 1978 (next to be held after the death of the
  current pope); results - Karol WOJTYLA was elected for life by the
  College of Cardinals
head of government: 
  Secretary of State Archbishop Angelo Cardinal SODANO (since NA 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Pontifical Commission; appointed by Pope
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Pontifical Commission
Judicial branch: 
  none; normally handled by Italy
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Other political or pressure groups: 
  none (exclusive of influence exercised by church officers)
Member of: 
  CSCE, IAEA, ICFTU, IMF (observer), INTELSAT, IOM (observer), ITU, OAS
  (observer), UN (observer), UNCTAD, UNHCR, UPU, WIPO, WTO (observer) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Apostolic Pro-Nuncio Archbishop Agostino CACCIAVILLAN 
chancery: 
  3339 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 333-7121 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Raymond L. FLYNN 
embassy: 
  Villino Pacelli, Via Aurelia 294, 00165 Rome 
mailing address: 
  PSC 59, APO AE 09624 
telephone: 
  [396] 46741 
FAX: 
  [396] 638-0159 
Flag: 
  two vertical bands of yellow (hoist side) and white with the crossed
  keys of Saint Peter and the papal miter centered in the white band

@Holy See (Vatican City), Economy

Overview: 
  This unique, noncommercial economy is supported financially by
  contributions (known as Peter's Pence) from Roman Catholics throughout
  the world, the sale of postage stamps and tourist mementos, fees for
  admission to museums, and the sale of publications. The incomes and
  living standards of lay workers are comparable to, or somewhat better
  than, those of counterparts who work in the city of Rome.
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $86 million 
expenditures: 
  $178 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,000 kW standby
production: 
  power supplied by Italy
consumption per capita: 
  NA (1992)
Industries: 
  printing and production of a small amount of mosaics and staff
  uniforms; worldwide banking and financial activities
Currency: 
  1 Vatican lira (VLit) = 100 centesimi
Exchange rates: 
  Vatican lire (VLit) per US$1 - 1,700.2 (January 1994), 1,573.7 (1993),
  1,232.4 (1992), 1,240.6 (1991), 1,198.1 (1990), 1,372.1 (1989); note -
  the Vatican lira is at par with the Italian lira which circulates
  freely
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Holy See (Vatican City), Communications

Railroads: 
  850 m, 750-mm gauge (links with Italian network near the Rome station
  of Saint Peter's)
Highways: 
  none; all city streets
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 3 AM, 4 FM, no TV; 2,000-line automatic telephone
  exchange; no communications satellite systems

@Holy See (Vatican City), Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Italy; Swiss Papal Guards are posted
  at entrances to the Vatican City


@Honduras, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, between Guatemala and Nicaragua
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  112,090 sq km 
land area: 
  111,890 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Tennessee
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,520 km, Guatemala 256 km, El Salvador 342 km, Nicaragua 922 km
Coastline: 
  820 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  land boundary dispute with El Salvador mostly resolved by 11 September
  1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision; ICJ referred the
  maritime boundary in the Golfo de Fonseca to an earlier agreement in
  this century and advised that some tripartite resolution among El
  Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua likely would be required
Climate: 
  subtropical in lowlands, temperate in mountains
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains in interior, narrow coastal plains
Natural resources: 
  timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron ore, antimony, coal,
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  14% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  30% 
forest and woodland: 
  34% 
other: 
  20% 
Irrigated land: 
  900 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  urban population expanding; deforestation results from logging and the
  clearing of land for agricultural purposes; further land degradation
  and soil erosion hastened by uncontrolled development and improper
  land use practices such as farming of marginal lands; mining
  activities polluting Lago de Yojoa (the country's largest source of
  freshwater) with heavy metals as well as several rivers and streams
natural hazards: 
  subject to frequent, but generally mild, earthquakes; damaging
  hurricanes and floods along Caribbean coast
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Tropical Timber

@Honduras, People

Population: 
  5,314,794 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.73% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  34.97 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.22 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  45.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.6 years 
male: 
  65.23 years 
female: 
  70.08 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.71 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Honduran(s) 
adjective: 
  Honduran 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo (mixed Indian and European) 90%, Indian 7%, black 2%, white 1%
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant minority 
Languages: 
  Spanish, Indian dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  73% 
male: 
  76% 
female: 
  71% 
Labor force: 
  1.3 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 62%, services 20%, manufacturing 9%, construction 3%,
  other 6% (1985)

@Honduras, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Honduras 
conventional short form: 
  Honduras 
local long form: 
  Republica de Honduras 
local short form: 
  Honduras 
Digraph: 
  HO
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Tegucigalpa 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Atlantida,
  Choluteca, Colon, Comayagua, Copan, Cortes, El Paraiso, Francisco
  Morazan, Gracias a Dios, Intibuca, Islas de la Bahia, La Paz, Lempira,
  Ocotepeque, Olancho, Santa Barbara, Valle, Yoro
Independence: 
  15 September 1821 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 15 September (1821) 
Constitution: 
  11 January 1982, effective 20 January 1982
Legal system: 
  rooted in Roman and Spanish civil law; some influence of English
  common law; accepts ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Carlos Roberto REINA Idiaquez (since 27 January 1994);
  election last held on 28 November 1993 (next to be held November
  1997); results - Carlos Roberto REINA Idiaquez (PLH) 53%, Oswaldo
  RAMOS Soto (PNH) 41%, other 6%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Congress (Congreso Nacional): 
  elections last held on 27 November 1993 (next to be held November
  1997); results - PNH 53%, PLH 41%, PDCH 1.0%, PINU-SD 2.5%, other
  2.5%; seats - (134 total) PNH 55, PLH 77, PINU-SD 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justica) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Liberal Party (PLH), Rafael PINEDA Ponce, president; National Party
  (PN) has two factions: Movimiento Nacional de Reivindication
  Callejista (Monarca), Rafael Leonardo CALLEJAS, and Oswaldista,
  Oswaldo RAMOS Soto, presidential candidate; National Innovation and
  Unity Party (PINU), Olban VALLADARES, president; Christian Democratic
  Party (PDCH), Efrain DIAZ Arrivillaga, president
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Association of Honduran Campesinos (ANACH); Honduran Council
  of Private Enterprise (COHEP); Confederation of Honduran Workers
  (CTH); National Union of Campesinos (UNC); General Workers
  Confederation (CGT); United Federation of Honduran Workers (FUTH);
  Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Honduras (CODEH);
  Coordinating Committee of Popular Organizations (CCOP)
Member of: 
  BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES,
  LAIA (observer), LORCS, MINURSO, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Rene Arturo BENDANA 
chancery: 
  3007 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 966-7702, 2604, 5008, 4596 
FAX: 
  (202) 966-9751 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, San
  Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
consulate(s): 
  Boston, Detroit, and Jacksonville 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William PRYCE 
embassy: 
  Avenida La Paz, Tegucigalpa 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy, APO AA 34022, Tegucigalpa 
telephone: 
  [504] 32-3120 
FAX: 
  [504] 32-0027 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and blue with five
  blue five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern centered in the white
  band; the stars represent the members of the former Federal Republic
  of Central America - Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and
  Nicaragua; similar to the flag of El Salvador, which features a round
  emblem encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA
  CENTRAL centered in the white band; also similar to the flag of
  Nicaragua, which features a triangle encircled by the word REPUBLICA
  DE NICARAGUA on top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom, centered in the
  white band

@Honduras, Economy

Overview: 
  Honduras is one of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere.
  Agriculture, the most important sector of the economy, accounts for
  more than 25% of GDP, employs 62% of the labor force, and produces
  two-thirds of exports. Productivity remains low. Industry, still in
  its early stages, employs nearly 9% of the labor force, accounts for
  15% of GDP, and generates 20% of exports. The service sectors,
  including public administration, account for 50% of GDP and employ 20%
  of the labor force. Basic problems facing the economy include rapid
  population growth, high unemployment, a lack of basic services, a
  large and inefficient public sector, and the dependence of the export
  sector mostly on coffee and bananas, which are subject to sharp price
  fluctuations. A far-reaching reform program initiated by former
  President CALLEJAS in 1990 is beginning to take hold. In 1993 the
  large fiscal deficit emerged as a key economic problem, the result of
  improvident state spending.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $10 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.7% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,950 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  13% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  10%; underemployed 30%-40% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $511 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $850 million (f.o.b., 1993 est)
commodities: 
  bananas, coffee, shrimp, lobster, minerals, meat, lumber
partners: 
  US 53%, Germany 11%, Belgium 8%, UK 5%
Imports: 
  $1.1 billion (c.i.f. 1993 est)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, chemical products, manufactured
  goods, fuel and oil, foodstuffs
partners: 
  US 50%, Mexico 8%, Guatemala 6%
External debt: 
  $2.8 billion (1990)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0.8% (1990 est.); accounts for 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  575,000 kW
production: 
  2 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  390 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  agricultural processing (sugar and coffee), textiles, clothing, wood
  products
Agriculture: 
  most important sector, accounting for more than 25% of GDP, more than
  60% of the labor force, and two-thirds of exports; principal products
  include bananas, coffee, timber, beef, citrus fruit, shrimp; importer
  of wheat
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine; illicit producer of cannabis,
  cultivated on small plots and used principally for local consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.1
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 lempira (L) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  lempiras (L) per US$1 - 7.2600 (December 1993), 7.2600 (1993), 5.8300
  (1992), 5.4000 (1991); 2.0000 (fixed rate until 1991) 5.70 parallel
  black-market rate (November 1990); the lempira was allowed to float in
  1992
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Honduras, Communications

Railroads: 
  785 km total; 508 km 1.067-meter gauge, 277 km 0.914-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  8,950 km 
paved: 
  1,700 km 
unpaved: 
  otherwise improved 5,000 km; unimproved earth 2,250 km 
Inland waterways: 
  465 km navigable by small craft
Ports: 
  Puerto Castilla, Puerto Cortes, San Lorenzo
Merchant marine: 
  270 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 831,856 GRT/1,248,186 DWT, bulk
  25, cargo 177, chemical tanker 2, combination bulk 1, container 7,
  liquified gas 1, oil tanker 22, passenger 2, passenger-cargo 2,
  refrigerated cargo 20, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger
  2, specialized tanker 2, vehicle carrier 1 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry; Russia owns 14 ships under the
  Honduran flag
Airports: 
total: 
  160 
usable: 
  133 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  14 
Telecommunications: 
  inadequate system with only 7 telephones per 1,000 persons;
  international services provided by 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  stations and the Central American microwave radio relay system;
  broadcast stations - 176 AM, no FM, 7 SW, 28 TV

@Honduras, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Marines), Air Force, Public Security Forces
  (FUSEP) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,229,777; fit for military service 732,866; reach
  military age (18) annually 60,445 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $42.8 million, about 1.3% of GDP (1993
  est.)


@Hong Kong

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Hong Kong, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, on the southeast coast of China bordering the South
  China Sea
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,040 sq km 
land area: 
  990 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than six times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 30 km, China 30 km 
Coastline: 
  733 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  3 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical monsoon; cool and humid in winter, hot and rainy from spring
  through summer, warm and sunny in fall
Terrain: 
  hilly to mountainous with steep slopes; lowlands in north
Natural resources: 
  outstanding deepwater harbor, feldspar 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  12% 
other: 
  79% 
Irrigated land: 
  20 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air and water pollution from rapid urbanization
natural hazards: 
  occasional typhoons
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  more than 200 islands

@Hong Kong, People

Population: 
  5,548,754 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -0.09% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.16 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.85 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -7.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  80.09 years 
male: 
  76.67 years 
female: 
  83.71 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.37 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Chinese 
adjective: 
  Chinese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chinese 95%, other 5% 
Religions: 
  eclectic mixture of local religions 90%, Christian 10% 
Languages: 
  Chinese (Cantonese), English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1971)
total population: 
  77% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  64% 
Labor force: 
  2.8 million (1990)
by occupation: 
  manufacturing 28.5%, wholesale and retail trade, restaurants, and
  hotels 27.9%, services 17.7%, financing, insurance, and real estate
  9.2%, transport and communications 4.5%, construction 2.5%, other 9.7%
  (1989)

@Hong Kong, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Hong Kong 
Abbreviation: 
  HK 
Digraph: 
  HK
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK scheduled to revert to China in 1997
Capital: 
  Victoria 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK; the UK signed an agreement with
  China on 19 December 1984 to return Hong Kong to China on 1 July 1997;
  in the joint declaration, China promises to respect Hong Kong's
  existing social and economic systems and lifestyle)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 29 August (1945) 
Constitution: 
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and practice; new Basic
  Law approved in March 1990 in preparation for 1997
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  direct election 21 years of age; universal for permanent residents
  living in the territory of Hong Kong for the past seven years;
  indirect election limited to about 100,000 professionals of electoral
  college and functional constituencies
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Governor Chris PATTEN (since 9 July 1992); Chief Secretary Anson CHAN
  Fang On-Sang (since 29 November 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; appointed by the governor
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council: 
  indirect elections last held 12 September 1991 and direct elections
  were held for the first time 15 September 1991 (next to be held in
  September 1995 when the number of directly-elected seats increases to
  20); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (60 total; 21
  indirectly elected by functional constituencies, 18 directly elected,
  18 appointed by governor, 3 ex officio members); indirect elections -
  number of seats by functional constituency NA; direct elections - UDHK
  12, Meeting Point 3, ADPL 1, other 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  United Democrats of Hong Kong, Martin LEE, chairman; Democratic
  Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong, TSANG Yuk-shing, chairman;
  Hong Kong Democratic Foundation, Dr. Patrick SHIU Kin-ying, chairman
note: 
  in April 1994, the United Democrats of Hong Kong and Meeting Point
  merged to form the "Democratic Party;" the merger becomes effective in
  October 1994
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Liberal Party, Allen LEE, chairman; Meeting Point, Anthony CHEUNG
  Bing-leung, chairman; Association for Democracy and People's
  Livelihood, Frederick FUNG Kin Kee, chairman; Liberal Democratic
  Federation, HU Fa-kuang, chairman; Federation of Trade Unions
  (pro-China), LEE Chark-tim, president; Hong Kong and Kowloon Trade
  Union Council (pro-Taiwan); Confederation of Trade Unions
  (pro-democracy), LAU Chin-shek, chairman; Hong Kong General Chamber of
  Commerce; Chinese General Chamber of Commerce (pro-China); Federation
  of Hong Kong Industries; Chinese Manufacturers' Association of Hong
  Kong; Hong Kong Professional Teachers' Union, CHEUNG Man-kwong,
  president; Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic
  Movement in China, Szeto WAH, chairman
note: 
  in April 1994, the United Democrats of Hong Kong and Meeting Point
  merged to form the "Democratic Party;" the merger becomes effective in
  October 1994
Member of: 
  COCOM (cooperating), APEC, AsDB, CCC, ESCAP (associate), GATT, ICFTU,
  IMO (associate), INTERPOL (subbureau), IOC, ISO (correspondent), WCL,
  WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Consul General Richard MUELLER 
consulate general: 
  26 Garden Road, Hong Kong 
mailing address: 
  PSC 464, Box 30, Hong Kong, or FPO AP 96522-0002 
telephone: 
  [852] 523-9011 
FAX: 
  [852] 845-1598 
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant with the
  Hong Kong coat of arms on a white disk centered on the outer half of
  the flag; the coat of arms contains a shield (bearing two junks below
  a crown) held by a lion (representing the UK) and a dragon
  (representing China) with another lion above the shield and a banner
  bearing the words HONG KONG below the shield

@Hong Kong, Economy

Overview: 
  Hong Kong has a bustling free market economy with few tariffs or
  nontariff barriers. Natural resources are limited, and food and raw
  materials must be imported. Manufacturing accounts for about 17% of
  GDP. Goods and services exports account for about 50% of GDP. Real GDP
  growth averaged a remarkable 8% in 1987-88, slowed to 3.0% in 1989-90,
  and picked up to 4.2% in 1991, 5.0% in 1992, and 5.2% in 1993.
  Unemployment, which has been declining since the mid-1980s, is now
  about 2%. A shortage of labor continues to put upward pressure on
  prices and the cost of living. Short-term prospects remain bright so
  long as major trading partners continue to be reasonably prosperous.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $119 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5.2% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $21,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.5% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.3% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $19.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $19.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY94)
Exports: 
  $145.1 billion (including re-exports of $104.2 billion )(f.o.b., 1993
  est.)
commodities: 
  clothing, textiles, yarn and fabric, footwear, electrical appliances,
  watches and clocks, toys
partners: 
  China 32%, US 23%, Germany 5%, Japan 5%, UK 3% (1993 est.)
Imports: 
  $149.6 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, transport equipment, raw materials, semimanufactures,
  petroleum
partners: 
  China 36%, Japan 19%, Taiwan 9%, US 7% (1993 est.)
External debt: 
  none (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  9,566,000 kW
production: 
  29.4 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,980 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, clothing, tourism, electronics, plastics, toys, watches,
  clocks
Agriculture: 
  minor role in the economy; local farmers produce 26% fresh vegetables,
  27% live poultry; 8% of land area suitable for farming
Illicit drugs: 
  a hub for Southeast Asian heroin trade; transshipment and major
  financial and money-laundering center
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-87), $152 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $923
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Hong Kong dollar (HK$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Hong Kong dollars (HK$) per US$ - 7.800 (1993), 7.741 (1992), 7.771
  (1991), 7.790 (1990), 7.800 (1989); note - linked to the US dollar at
  the rate of about 7.8 HK$ per 1 US$ since 1985
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Hong Kong, Communications

Railroads: 
  35 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  1,100 km 
paved: 
  794 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 306 km 
Ports: 
  Hong Kong
Merchant marine: 
  201 ships (1,000 GRT or over), totaling 6,972,233 GRT/11,965,809 DWT,
  bulk 105, cargo 23, chemical tanker 3, combination bulk 2, combination
  ore/oil 6, container 29, liquefied gas 7, oil tanker 16, refrigerated
  cargo 7, short-sea passenger 1, vehicle carrier 2 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry; ships registered in Hong Kong fly the
  UK flag, and an estimated 500 Hong Kong-owned ships are registered
  elsewhere
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  modern facilities provide excellent domestic and international
  services; 3,000,000 telephones; microwave transmission links and
  extensive optical fiber transmission network; broadcast stations - 6
  AM, 6 FM, 4 TV; 1 British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) repeater
  station and 1 British Forces Broadcasting Service repeater station;
  2,500,000 radio receivers; 1,312,000 TV sets (1,224,000 color TV
  sets); satellite earth stations - 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT and 2
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT; coaxial cable to Guangzhou, China; links to 5
  international submarine cables providing access to ASEAN member
  nations, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, Middle East, and Western Europe

@Hong Kong, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Headquarters of British Forces, Royal Navy, Royal Air Force, Royal
  Hong Kong Auxiliary Air Force, Royal Hong Kong Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,636,397; fit for military service 1,251,901; reach
  military age (18) annually 42,044 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $300 million, 0.5% of GDP (1989 est.); this
  represents one-fourth of the total cost of defending itself, the
  remainder being paid by the UK
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Howland Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Howland Island, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 2,575 km southwest of
  Honolulu, just north of the Equator, about halfway between Hawaii and
  Australia
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.6 sq km 
land area: 
  1.6 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 2.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  6.4 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun
Terrain: 
  low-lying, nearly level, sandy, coral island surrounded by a narrow
  fringing reef; depressed central area
Natural resources: 
  guano (deposits worked until late 1800s) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  5% 
other: 
  95% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lacks freshwater
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  almost totally covered with grasses, prostrate vines, and low-growing
  shrubs; small area of trees in the center; primarily a nesting,
  roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds, and marine
  wildlife; feral cats

@Howland Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited; note - American civilians evacuated in 1942 after
  Japanese air and naval attacks during World War II; occupied by US
  military during World War II, but abandoned after the war; public
  entry is by special-use permit only and generally restricted to
  scientists and educators

@Howland Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Howland Island 
Digraph: 
  HQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the Fish and
  Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the
  National Wildlife Refuge System
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC

@Howland Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Howland Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only, one boat landing area along the middle
  of the west coast
Airports: 
  airstrip constructed in 1937 for scheduled refueling stop on the
  round-the-world flight of Amelia Earhart and Fred Noonan - they left
  Lae, New Guinea, for Howland Island, but were never seen again; the
  airstrip is no longer serviceable
Note: 
  Earhart Light is a day beacon near the middle of the west coast that
  was partially destroyed during World War II, but has since been
  rebuilt in memory of famed aviatrix Amelia Earhart

@Howland Island, Defense Forces

  defense is the responsibility of the US; visited annually by the US
  Coast Guard


@Hungary, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between Slovakia and Romania
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  93,030 sq km 
land area: 
  92,340 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Indiana
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,989 km, Austria 366 km, Croatia 329 km, Romania 443 km, Serbia
  and Montenegro 151 km (all with Serbia), Slovakia 515 km, Slovenia 82
  km, Ukraine 103 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Gabcikovo Dam dispute with Slovakia
Climate: 
  temperate; cold, cloudy, humid winters; warm summers
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to rolling plains
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, coal, natural gas, fertile soils 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  50.7% 
permanent crops: 
  6.1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  12.6% 
forest and woodland: 
  18.3% 
other: 
  12.3% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,750 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution; industrial and municipal pollution of Lake Balaton
natural hazards: 
  levees are common along many streams, but flooding occurs almost every
  year
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile
  Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; strategic location astride main land routes between
  Western Europe and Balkan Peninsula as well as between Ukraine and
  Mediterranean basin

@Hungary, People

Population: 
  10,319,113 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -0.03% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.72 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.37 years 
male: 
  67.37 years 
female: 
  75.58 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Hungarian(s) 
adjective: 
  Hungarian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Hungarian 89.9%, Gypsy 4%, German 2.6%, Serb 2%, Slovak 0.8%, Romanian
  0.7% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 67.5%, Calvinist 20%, Lutheran 5%, atheist and other
  7.5% 
Languages: 
  Hungarian 98.2%, other 1.8% 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  5.4 million 
by occupation: 
  services, trade, government, and other 44.8%, industry 29.7%,
  agriculture 16.1%, construction 7.0% (1991)

@Hungary, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Hungary 
conventional short form: 
  Hungary 
local long form: 
  Magyar Koztarsasag 
local short form: 
  Magyarorszag 
Digraph: 
  HU
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Budapest 
Administrative divisions: 
  38 counties (megyek, singular - megye) and 1 capital city* (fovaros);
  Bacs-Kiskun, Baranya, Bekes, Bekescsaba, Borsod-Abauj-Zemplen,
  Budapest*, Csongrad, Debrecen, Dunaujvaros, Eger, Fejer, Gyor,
  Gyor-Moson-Sopron, Hajdu-Bihar, Heves, Hodmezovasarhely,
  Jasz-Nagykun-Szolnok, Kaposvar, Kecskemet, Komarom-Esztergom, Miskolc,
  Nagykanizsa, Nograd, Nyiregyhaza, Pecs, Pest, Somogy, Sopron,
  Szabolcs-Szatmar-Bereg, Szeged, Szekesfehervar, Szolnok, Szombathely,
  Tatabanya, Tolna, Vas, Veszprem, Zala, Zalaegerszeg
Independence: 
  1001 (unification by King Stephen I)
National holiday: 
  St. Stephen's Day (National Day), 20 August (commemorates the founding
  of Hungarian state circa 1000 A.D.)
Constitution: 
  18 August 1949, effective 20 August 1949, revised 19 April 1972; 18
  October 1989 revision ensured legal rights for individuals and
  constitutional checks on the authority of the prime minister and also
  established the principle of parliamentary oversight
Legal system: 
  in process of revision, moving toward rule of law based on Western
  model
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Arpad GONCZ (since 3 August 1990; previously interim
  president from 2 May 1990); election last held 3 August 1990 (next to
  be held NA 1995); results - President GONCZ elected by parliamentary
  vote; note - President GONCZ was elected by the National Assembly with
  a total of 295 votes out of 304 as interim President from 2 May 1990
  until elected President
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Peter BOROSS (since 12 December 1993 on the death of
  Jozsef ANTALL); new prime minister will probably be Gyula HORN
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; elected by the National Assembly on
  recommendation of the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Orszaggyules): 
  elections last held on 8 and 29 May 1994 (next to be held spring
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (386 total)
  Hungarian Socialist Party 209, Alliance of Free Democrats 70,
  Hungarian Democratic Forum 37, Independent Smallholders 26, Christian
  Democratic People's Party 22, Federation of Young Democrats 20, other
  2
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Forum, Sandor LESZAK, chairman; Independent Smallholders
  (FKGP), Jozsef TORGYAN, president; Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP),
  Gyula HORN, president; Christian Democratic People's Party (KDNP), Dr.
  Lazlo SURJAN, president; Federation of Young Democrats (FIDESZ),
  Viktor ORBAN, chairman; Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ), Ivan PETO,
  chairman
note: 
  the Hungarian Socialist (Communist) Workers' Party (MSZMP) renounced
  Communism and became the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP) in October
  1989; there is still a small MSZMP
Member of: 
  Australian Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, COCOM (cooperating), CSCE,
  EBRD, ECE, FAO, G-9, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MTCR, NACC, NAM
  (guest), NSG, OAS (observer), PCA, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMOZ, UNOMUR, UNOSOM, UNTAC, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Pal TAR 
chancery: 
  3910 Shoemaker Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 362-6730 
FAX: 
  (202) 966-8135 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Donald BLINKEN 
embassy: 
  V. Szabadsag Ter 12, Budapest 
mailing address: 
  Am Embassy, Unit 1320, Budapest; APO AE 09213 
telephone: 
  [36] (1) 112-6450 
FAX: 
  [36] (1) 132-8934 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and green

@Hungary, Economy

Overview: 
  Hungary is still in the midst of a difficult transition from a command
  to a market economy. Its economic reforms during the Communist era
  gave it a head start on this process, particularly in terms of
  attracting foreign investors - Hungary has accounted for about half of
  all foreign direct investment in Eastern Europe since 1989.
  Nonetheless, the economy continued to contract in 1993, with real GDP
  falling perhaps 1%. Although the privatization process has lagged, in
  December 1993 Hungary carried out the largest privatization yet in
  Eastern Europe, selling a controlling interest in the Matav
  telecommunications firm to private investors - including a 30% share
  to a US-German consortium for $875 million. Overall, about half of GDP
  now originates in the private sector. Unemployment rose to about 13%
  in 1993 while inflation remained above 20%, and falling exports pushed
  the trade deficit to about $3 billion. The government hopes that
  economic recovery in Western Europe in 1994 will boost exports, lower
  the trade deficit, and help jump-start the economy. The budget,
  however, is likely to remain a serious concern; depressed tax revenue
  pushed up the budget deficit in 1993.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $57 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  23% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  13% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $10.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $12.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $8.9 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  raw materials, semi-finished goods, chemicals 39.6%, machinery 14.5%,
  consumer goods 22.3%, food and agriculture 20.0%, fuels and energy
  3.6% (January-June 1993)
partners: 
  EC 49.8% (Germany 27.8%, Italy 9.5%), Austria 10.7%, the FSU 13.1%,
  Eastern Europe 9.8% (1992)
Imports: 
  $12.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  fuels and energy 13.9%, raw materials, semi-finished goods, chemicals
  35.9%, machinery 22.4%, consumer goods 21.8%, food and agriculture
  6.0% (January-June 1993)
partners: 
  EC 42.8% (Germany 23.6%, Italy 6.3%), Austria 14.4%, the FSU 16.8%,
  Eastern Europe 9.2%
External debt: 
  $24.7 billion (November 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  7,200,000 kW
production: 
  30 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,000 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  mining, metallurgy, construction materials, processed foods, textiles,
  chemicals (especially pharmaceuticals), buses, automobiles
Agriculture: 
  including forestry, accounts for 15% of GDP and 16% of employment;
  highly diversified crop and livestock farming; principal crops -
  wheat, corn, sunflowers, potatoes, sugar beets; livestock - hogs,
  cattle, poultry, dairy products; self-sufficient in food output
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southeast Asia heroin transiting the Balkan
  route
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  assistance pledged by OECD countries since 1989 about $9 billion 
Currency: 
  1 forint (Ft) = 100 filler
Exchange rates: 
  forints per US$1 - 93.46 (September 1993), 92.5 (1993), 78.99 (1992),
  74.74 (1991), 63.21 (1990), 59.07 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Hungary, Communications

Railroads: 
  7,765 km total; 7,508 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, 222 km narrow
  gauge (mostly 0.760-meter), 35 km 1.520-meter broad gauge; 1,236 km
  double track, 2,249 km electrified; all government owned (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  130,224 km 
paved: 
  61,948 km 
unpaved: 
  68,276 km (1988)
Inland waterways: 
  1,622 km (1988)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,204 km; natural gas 4,387 km (1991)
Ports: 
  Budapest and Dunaujvaros are river ports on the Danube; coastal
  outlets are Rostock (Germany), Gdansk (Poland), Gdynia (Poland),
  Szczecin (Poland), Galati (Romania), and Braila (Romania)
Merchant marine: 
  10 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) and 1 bulk totaling 46,121
  GRT/61,613 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  126 
usable: 
  65 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  18 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  31 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  automatic telephone network based on microwave radio relay system;
  1,128,800 phones (1991); telephone density is at 19.4 per 100
  inhabitants; 49% of all phones are in Budapest; 608,000 telephones on
  order (1991); 12-15 year wait for a phone; 14,213 telex lines (1991);
  broadcast stations - 32 AM, 15 FM, 41 TV (8 Soviet TV repeaters); 4.2
  million TVs (1990); 1 satellite ground station using INTELSAT and
  Intersputnik

@Hungary, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Air and Air Defense Forces, Border Guard, Territorial
  Defense 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,636,888; fit for military service 2,105,628; reach
  military age (18) annually 90,134 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  66.5 billion forints, NA% of GNP (1993 est.); note - conversion of
  defense expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate
  could produce misleading results


@Iceland, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe, in the North Atlantic Ocean, between
  Greenland and Norway
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Europe, North America, Standard Time Zones of the World
Area: 
total area: 
  103,000 sq km 
land area: 
  100,250 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Kentucky
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  4,988 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Rockall continental shelf dispute involving Denmark, Ireland, and the
  UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall
  area)
Climate: 
  temperate; moderated by North Atlantic Current; mild, windy winters;
  damp, cool summers
Terrain: 
  mostly plateau interspersed with mountain peaks, icefields; coast
  deeply indented by bays and fiords
Natural resources: 
  fish, hydropower, geothermal power, diatomite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  1% 
other: 
  78% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from fertilizer runoff; inadequate wastewater
  treatment
natural hazards: 
  subject to earthquakes and volcanic activity
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Environmental
  Modification, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  strategic location between Greenland and Europe; westernmost European
  country; more land covered by glaciers than in all of continental
  Europe

@Iceland, People

Population: 
  263,599 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  population data estimates based on average growth rate may differ
  slightly from official population data because of volatile migration
  rates
Population growth rate: 
  0.9% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.41 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.72 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.83 years 
male: 
  76.57 years 
female: 
  81.21 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.11 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Icelander(s) 
adjective: 
  Icelandic 
Ethnic divisions: 
  homogeneous mixture of descendants of Norwegians and Celts
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 96%, other Protestant and Roman Catholic 3%, none
  1% (1988)
Languages: 
  Icelandic 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1976 est.)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  127,900 
by occupation: 
  commerce, transportation, and services 60.0%, manufacturing 12.5%,
  fishing and fish processing 11.8%, construction 10.8%, agriculture
  4.0% (1990)

@Iceland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Iceland 
conventional short form: 
  Iceland 
local long form: 
  Lyoveldio Island 
local short form: 
  Island 
Digraph: 
  IC
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Reykjavik 
Administrative divisions: 
  23 counties (syslar, singular - sysla) and 14 independent towns*
  (kaupstadhir, singular - kaupstadhur); Akranes*, Akureyri*,
  Arnessysla, Austur-Bardhastrandarsysla, Austur-Hunavatnssysla,
  Austur-Skaftafellssysla, Borgarfjardharsysla, Dalasysla,
  Eyjafjardharsysla, Gullbringusysla, Hafnarfjordhur*, Husavik*,
  Isafjordhur*, Keflavik*, Kjosarsysla, Kopavogur*, Myrasysla,
  Neskaupstadhur*, Nordhur-Isafjardharsysla, Nordhur-Mulasys-la,
  Nordhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Olafsfjordhur*, Rangarvallasysla, Reykjavik*,
  Saudharkrokur*, Seydhisfjordhur*, Siglufjordhur*, Skagafjardharsysla,
  Snaefellsnes-og Hnappadalssysla, Strandasysla, Sudhur-Mulasysla,
  Sudhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Vesttmannaeyjar*, Vestur-Bardhastrandarsysla,
  Vestur-Hunavatnssysla, Vestur-Isafjardharsysla,
  Vestur-Skaftafellssysla
Independence: 
  17 June 1944 (from Denmark)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Establishment of the Republic, 17 June (1944) 
Constitution: 
  16 June 1944, effective 17 June 1944
Legal system: 
  civil law system based on Danish law; does not accept compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Vigdis FINNBOGADOTTIR (since 1 August 1980); election last
  held on 29 June 1988 (next scheduled for June 1996); results - there
  was no election in 1992 as President Vigdis FINNBOGADOTTIR was
  unopposed
head of government: 
  Prime Minister David ODDSSON (since 30 April 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Althing): 
  elections last held on 20 April 1991 (next to be held by April 1995);
  results - Independence Party 38.6%, Progressive Party 18.9%, Social
  Democratic Party 15.5%, People's Alliance 14.4%, Womens List 8.3%,
  Liberals 1.2%, other 3.1%; seats - (63 total) Independence 26,
  Progressive 13, Social Democratic 10, People's Alliance 9, Womens List
  5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Haestirettur) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Independence Party (conservative), David ODDSSON; Progressive Party,
  Steingrimur HERMANNSSON; Social Democratic Party, Jon Baldvin
  HANNIBALSSON; People's Alliance (left socialist), Olafur Ragnar
  GRIMSSON; Women's List
Member of: 
  Australian Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, FAO, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NC, NEA,
  NIB, OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WEU (associate), WHO, WIPO,
  WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Einar BENEDIKTSSON 
chancery: 
  2022 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-6653 through 6655 
FAX: 
  (202) 265-6656 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Parker W. BORG 
embassy: 
  Laufasvegur 21, Box 40, Reykjavik 
mailing address: 
  US Embassy, PSC 1003, Box 40, Reykjavik; FPO AE 09728-0340 
telephone: 
  [354] (1) 629100 
FAX: 
  [354] (1) 629139 
Flag: 
  blue with a red cross outlined in white that extends to the edges of
  the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side
  in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

@Iceland, Economy

Overview: 
  Iceland's Scandinavian-type economy is basically capitalistic, but
  with an extensive welfare system, relatively low unemployment, and
  comparatively even distribution of income. The economy is heavily
  dependent on the fishing industry, which provides nearly 75% of export
  earnings and employs 12% of the workforce. In the absence of other
  natural resources - except energy - Iceland's economy is vulnerable to
  changing world fish prices. Iceland's economy has been in recession
  since 1988. The recession continued in 1993 due to a third year of
  cutbacks in fishing quotas as well as falling world prices for the
  country's main exports: fish and fish products, aluminum, and
  ferrosilicon. Real GDP declined 3.3% in 1992 and rose slightly, by
  0.4%, in 1993. The center-right government's economic goals include
  reducing the budget and current account deficits, limiting foreign
  borrowing, containing inflation, revising agricultural and fishing
  policies, diversifying the economy, and privatizing state-owned
  industries. The recession has led to a wave of bankruptcies and
  mergers throughout the economy, as well as the highest unemployment of
  the post-World War II period. Inflation, previously a serious problem,
  declined from double digit rates in the 1980s to only 3.7% in 1992-93.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $4.2 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $16,000 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  4.5% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $191 million (1992)
Exports: 
  $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  fish and fish products, animal products, aluminum, ferrosilicon,
  diatomite
partners: 
  EC 68% (UK 25%, FRG 12%), US 11%, Japan 8% (1992)
Imports: 
  $1.5 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum products,
  foodstuffs, textiles
partners: 
  EC 53% (Germany 14%, Denmark 10%, UK 9%), Norway 14%, US 9% (1992)
External debt: 
  $3.9 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.75% (1991 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,063,000 kW
production: 
  5.165 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  19,940 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  fish processing, aluminum smelting, ferro-silicon production,
  geothermal power
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 15% of GDP; fishing is most important economic
  activity, contributing nearly 75% to export earnings; principal crops
  - potatoes, turnips; livestock - cattle, sheep; self-sufficient in
  crops; fish catch of about 1.1 million metric tons in 1992
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-81), $19.1 million 
Currency: 
  1 Icelandic krona (IKr) = 100 aurar
Exchange rates: 
  Icelandic kronur (IKr) per US$1 - 72.971 (January 1994), 67.603
  (1993), 57.546 (1992), 58.996 (1991), 58.284 (1990), 57.042 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Iceland, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  12,537 km 
paved: 
  2,690 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 9,847 km 
Ports: 
  Reykjavik, Akureyri, Hafnarfjordhur, Keflavik, Seydhisfjordhur,
  Siglufjordhur, Vestmannaeyjar
Merchant marine: 
  8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 33,212 GRT/47,359 DWT, cargo 2,
  chemical tanker 1, oil tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  90 
usable: 
  84 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  12 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate domestic service; coaxial and fiber-optical cables and
  microwave radio relay for trunk network; 140,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 5 AM, 147 (transmitters and repeaters) FM, 202
  (transmitters and repeaters) TV; 2 submarine cables; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station carries all international traffic; a second
  INTELSAT earth station is scheduled to be operational in 1993

@Iceland, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Police, Coast Guard 
note: 
  no armed forces, Iceland's defense is provided by the US-manned
  Icelandic Defense Force (IDF) headquartered at Keflavik
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 70,074; fit for military service 62,197 
Defense expenditures: 
  none


@India, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, bordering the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal,
  between Bangladesh and Pakistan
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  3,287,590 km2
land area: 
  2,973,190 km2
comparative area: 
  slightly more than one-third the size of the US
Land boundaries: 
  total 14,103 km, Bangladesh 4,053 km, Bhutan 605 km, Burma 1,463 km,
  China 3,380 km, Nepal 1,690 km, Pakistan 2,912 km 
Coastline: 
  7,000 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  boundaries with Bangladesh and China; status of Kashmir with Pakistan;
  water-sharing problems with downstream riparians, Bangladesh over the
  Ganges and Pakistan over the Indus
Climate: 
  varies from tropical monsoon in south to temperate in north
Terrain: 
  upland plain (Deccan Plateau) in south, flat to rolling plain along
  the Ganges, deserts in west, Himalayas in north
Natural resources: 
  coal (fourth-largest reserves in the world), iron ore, manganese,
  mica, bauxite, titanium ore, chromite, natural gas, diamonds,
  petroleum, limestone 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  55% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  23% 
other: 
  17% 
Irrigated land: 
  430,390 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; overgrazing; desertification; air
  pollution from industrial effluents and vehicle emissions; water
  pollution from raw sewage and runoff of agricultural pesticides; huge
  and rapidly growing population is overstraining natural resources
natural hazards: 
  droughts, flash floods, severe thunderstorms common; subject to
  earthquakes (a quake measuring 6.4 on the Richter scale occurred near
  Hyderabad killing several thousand people and causing extensive damage
  in late September 1993)
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber,
  Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  dominates South Asian subcontinent; near important Indian Ocean trade
  routes

@India, People

Population: 
  919,903,056 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.82% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.45 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.29 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  78.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  58.58 years 
male: 
  58.09 years 
female: 
  59.09 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.48 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Indian(s) 
adjective: 
  Indian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Indo-Aryan 72%, Dravidian 25%, Mongoloid and other 3% 
Religions: 
  Hindu 80%, Muslim 14%, Christian 2.4%, Sikh 2%, Buddhist 0.7%, Jains
  0.5%, other 0.4% 
Languages: 
  English enjoys associate status but is the most important language for
  national, political, and commercial communication, Hindi the national
  language and primary tongue of 30% of the people, Bengali (official),
  Telugu (official), Marathi (official), Tamil (official), Urdu
  (official), Gujarati (official), Malayalam (official), Kannada
  (official), Oriya (official), Punjabi (official), Assamese (official),
  Kashmiri (official), Sindhi (official), Sanskrit (official),
  Hindustani a popular variant of Hindu/Urdu, is spoken widely
  throughout northern India
note: 
  24 languages each spoken by a million or more persons; numerous other
  languages and dialects, for the most part mutually unintelligible
Literacy: 
  age 7 and over can read and write (1991 est.)
total population: 
  52.11% 
male: 
  63.86% 
female: 
  39.42% 
Labor force: 
  314.751 million (1990)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 65% (1993 est.)

@India, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of India 
conventional short form: 
  India 
Digraph: 
  IN
Type: 
  federal republic 
Capital: 
  New Delhi 
Administrative divisions: 
  25 states and 7 union territories*; Andaman and Nicobar Islands*,
  Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh*, Dadra
  and Nagar Haveli*, Daman and Diu*, Delhi*, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,
  Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep*,
  Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
  Orissa, Pondicherry*, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
  Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal
Independence: 
  15 August 1947 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Proclamation of the Republic, 26 January (1950) 
Constitution: 
  26 January 1950
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; limited judicial review of legislative
  acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Shankar Dayal SHARMA (since 25 July 1992); Vice President
  Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN (since 21 August 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha RAO (since 21 June 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on recommendation of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Sansad)
Council of States (Rajya Sabha): 
  body consisting of not more than 250 members, up to 12 appointed by
  the president, the remainder chosen by the elected members of the
  state and territorial assemblies
People's Assembly (Lok Sabha): 
  elections last held 21 May, 12 and 15 June 1991 (next to be held by
  November 1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (545
  total, 543 elected, 2 appointed) Congress (I) Party 245, Bharatiya
  Janata Party 119, Janata Dal Party 39, Janata Dal (Ajit Singh) 20,
  CPI/M 35, CPI 14, Telugu Desam 13, AIADMK 11, Samajwadi Janata Party
  5, Shiv Sena 4, RSP 4, BSP 1, Congress (S) Party 1, other 23, vacant 9
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Congress (I) Party, P. V. Narasimha RAO, president; Bharatiya Janata
  Party (BJP), L.K. ADVANI; Janata Dal Party, Chandra SHEKHAR; Janata
  Dal (Ajit Singh), Ajit SINGH; Communist Party of India/Marxist
  (CPI/M), Harkishan Singh SURJEET; Communist Party of India (CPI),
  Indrajit GUPTA; Telugu Desam (a regional party in Andhra Pradesh), N.
  T. Rama RAO; All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazagham (AIADMK; a
  regional party in Tamil Nadu), Jayaram JAYALALITHA; Samajwadi Party
  (SP, formerly Samajwadi Janata Party), Mulayam Singh YADAV
  (President), Om Prakash CHAUTALA, Devi LAL; Shiv Sena, Bal THACKERAY;
  Revolutionary Socialist Party (RSP), Tridip CHOWDHURY; Bahujana Samaj
  Party (BSP), Kanshi RAM; Congress (S) Party, leader NA; Communist
  Party of India/Marxist-Leninist (CPI/ML), Vinod MISHRA; Dravida
  Munnetra Kazagham (a regional party in Tamil Nadu), M. KARUNANIDHI;
  Akali Dal factions representing Sikh religious community in the
  Punjab; National Conference (NC; a regional party in Jammu and
  Kashmir), Farooq ABDULLAH
Other political or pressure groups: 
  various separatist groups seeking greater communal and/or regional
  autonomy; numerous religious or militant/chauvinistic organizations,
  including Adam Sena, Ananda Marg, Vishwa Hindu Parishad, and Rashtriya
  Swayamsevak Sangh
Member of: 
  AG (observer), AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-6, G-15, G-19, AfDB,
  G-24, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAS (observer), ONUSAL, PCA, SAARC, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMOZ, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Siddhartha Shankar RAY 
chancery: 
  2107 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-7000 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Frank WISNER 
embassy: 
  Shanti Path, Chanakyapuri 110021, New Delhi 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [91] (11) 600651 
FAX: 
  [91] (11) 687-2028 
consulate(s) general: 
  Bombay, Calcutta, Madras 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and green with a
  blue chakra (24-spoked wheel) centered in the white band; similar to
  the flag of Niger, which has a small orange disk centered in the white
  band

@India, Economy

Overview: 
  India's economy is a mixture of traditional village farming, modern
  agriculture, handicrafts, a wide range of modern industries, and a
  multitude of support services. Faster economic growth in the 1980s
  permitted a significant increase in real per capita private
  consumption. A large share of the population, perhaps as much as 40%,
  remains too poor to afford an adequate diet. Financial strains in 1990
  and 1991 prompted government austerity measures that slowed industrial
  growth but permitted India to meet its international payment
  obligations without rescheduling its debt. Policy reforms since 1991
  have extended earlier economic liberalization and greatly reduced
  government controls on production, trade, and investment. US and other
  foreign firms are increasing their investment in India. In January
  1994, international financial reserves were comfortably high.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.17 trillion (FY94 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.8% (FY94 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,300 (FY94 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  8% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $29.6 billion 
expenditures: 
  $45.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $11.2 billion (FY93)
Exports: 
  $21.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  gems and jewelry, clothing, engineering goods, chemicals, leather
  manufactures, cotton yarn, and fabric
partners: 
  US 18.9%, Germany 7.8%, Italy 7.8%, (FY93)
Imports: 
  $22 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  crude oil and petroleum products, gems, fertilizer, chemicals,
  machinery
partners: 
  US 9.8%, Belgium 8.4%, Germany 7.6% (FY93)
External debt: 
  $90.1 billion (March 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2% (1993 est.); accounts for about 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  82,000,000 kW
production: 
  310 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  340 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, chemicals, food processing, steel, transportation equipment,
  cement, mining, petroleum, machinery
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 40% of GDP and employs 65% of labor force;
  principal crops - rice, wheat, oilseeds, cotton, jute, tea, sugarcane,
  potatoes; livestock - cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats, poultry; fish
  catch of about 3 million metric tons ranks India among the world's top
  10 fishing nations
Illicit drugs: 
  licit producer of opium poppy for the pharmaceutical trade, but some
  opium is diverted to illicit international drug markets; major transit
  country for illicit narcotics produced in neighboring countries;
  illicit producer of hashish; minor production of illicit opium
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $4.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1980-89), $31.7
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $315 million; USSR (1970-89),
  $11.6 billion; Eastern Europe (1970-89), $105 million 
Currency: 
  1 Indian rupee (Re) = 100 paise
Exchange rates: 
  Indian rupees (Rs) per US$1 - 31.370 (January 1994), 30.493 (1993),
  25.918 (1992), 22.742 (1991), 17.504 (1990), 16.226 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@India, Communications

Railroads: 
  61,850 km total (1986); 33,553 km 1.676-meter broad gauge, 24,051 km
  1.000-meter gauge, 4,246 km narrow gauge (0.762 meter and 0.610
  meter); 12,617 km is double track; 6,500 km is electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  1.97 million km 
paved: 
  960,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 1.01 million km (1989)
Inland waterways: 
  16,180 km; 3,631 km navigable by large vessels
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 3,497 km; petroleum products 1,703 km; natural gas 902 km
  (1989)
Ports: 
  Bombay, Calcutta, Cochin, Kandla, Madras, New Mangalore, Port Blair
  (Andaman Islands)
Merchant marine: 
  297 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,236,902 GRT/10,369,948 DWT,
  bulk 111, cargo 81, chemical tanker 9, combination bulk 2, combination
  ore/oil 7, container 7, liquefied gas 6, oil tanker 66,
  passenger-cargo 6, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea passenger 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  337 
usable: 
  288 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  208 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  59 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  92 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic telephone system is poor providing only one telephone for
  about 200 persons on average; long distance telephoning has been
  improved by a domestic satellite system which also carries TV;
  international service is provided by 3 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth
  stations and by submarine cables to Malaysia and the United Arab
  Emirates; broadcast stations - 96 AM, 4 FM, 274 TV (government
  controlled)

@India, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Security or Paramilitary Forces (including
  Border Security Force, Assam Rifles, and Coast Guard)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 247,948,906; fit for military service 145,881,705;
  reach military age (17) annually 9,408,586 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $6.0 billion, 2.4% of GDP (FY93/94)


@Indian Ocean, Geography

Location: 
  body of water between Africa, Asia, Australia, and Antarctica
Map references: 
  Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  73.6 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than eight times the size of the US; third-largest ocean
  (after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, but larger than the
  Arctic Ocean)
note: 
  includes Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Strait of
  Malacca, Great Australian Bight, Gulf of Oman, Mozambique Channel, and
  other tributary water bodies
Coastline: 
  66,526 km 
International disputes: 
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)
Climate: 
  northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest monsoon (June to
  October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June and October/November
  in the north Indian Ocean and January/February in the south Indian
  Ocean
Terrain: 
  surface dominated by counterclockwise gyre (broad, circular system of
  currents) in the south Indian Ocean; unique reversal of surface
  currents in the north Indian Ocean, low atmospheric pressure over
  southwest Asia from hot, rising, summer air results in the southwest
  monsoon and southwest-to-northeast winds and currents, while high
  pressure over northern Asia from cold, falling, winter air results in
  the northeast monsoon and northeast-to-southwest winds and currents;
  ocean floor is dominated by the Mid-Indian Ocean Ridge and subdivided
  by the Southeast Indian Ocean Ridge, Southwest Indian Ocean Ridge, and
  Ninety East Ridge; maximum depth is 7,258 meters in the Java Trench
Natural resources: 
  oil and gas fields, fish, shrimp, sand and gravel aggregates, placer
  deposits, polymetallic nodules 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  endangered marine species include the dugong, seals, turtles, and
  whales; oil pollution in the Arabian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of Hormuz, Strait of
  Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and the Lombok Strait;
  ships subject to superstructure icing in extreme south near Antarctica
  from May to October

@Indian Ocean, Government

Digraph: 
  XO

@Indian Ocean, Economy

Overview: 
  The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes connecting the Middle East,
  Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the Americas. It carries a
  particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and petroleum products from
  the oil fields of the Persian Gulf and Indonesia. Its fish are of
  great and growing importance to the bordering countries for domestic
  consumption and export. Fishing fleets from Russia, Japan, Korea, and
  Taiwan also exploit the Indian Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna.
  Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being tapped in the offshore areas
  of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and Western Australia. An estimated 40%
  of the world's offshore oil production comes from the Indian Ocean.
  Beach sands rich in heavy minerals and offshore placer deposits are
  actively exploited by bordering countries, particularly India, South
  Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.
Industries: 
  based on exploitation of natural resources, particularly fish,
  minerals, oil and gas, fishing, sand and gravel

@Indian Ocean, Communications

Ports: 
  Bombay (India), Calcutta (India), Madras (India), Colombo (Sri Lanka),
  Durban (South Africa), Fremantle (Australia), Jakarta (Indonesia),
  Melbourne (Australia), Richards Bay (South Africa)
Telecommunications: 
  submarine cables from India to United Arab Emirates and Malaysia, and
  from Sri Lanka to Djibouti and Indonesia


@Indonesia, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, between Malaysia and Australia
Map references: 
  Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,919,440 sq km 
land area: 
  1,826,440 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three times the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,602 km, Malaysia 1,782 km, Papua New Guinea 820 km 
Coastline: 
  54,716 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  sovereignty over Timor Timur (East Timor Province) disputed with
  Portugal and not recognized by the UN; two islands in dispute with
  Malaysia
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands
Terrain: 
  mostly coastal lowlands; larger islands have interior mountains
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, tin, natural gas, nickel, timber, bauxite, copper, fertile
  soils, coal, gold, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  67% 
other: 
  15% 
Irrigated land: 
  75,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; water pollution from industrial wastes, sewage; air
  pollution in urban areas
natural hazards: 
  occasional floods, severe droughts, and tsunamis
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  archipelago of 13,500 islands (6,000 inhabited); straddles Equator;
  strategic location astride or along major sea lanes from Indian Ocean
  to Pacific Ocean

@Indonesia, People

Population: 
  200,409,741 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.59% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.45 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.6 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  67.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  60.74 years 
male: 
  58.7 years 
female: 
  62.88 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.8 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Indonesian(s) 
adjective: 
  Indonesian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Javanese 45%, Sundanese 14%, Madurese 7.5%, coastal Malays 7.5%, other
  26% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 87%, Protestant 6%, Roman Catholic 3%, Hindu 2%, Buddhist 1%,
  other 1% (1985)
Languages: 
  Bahasa Indonesia (modified form of Malay; official), English, Dutch,
  local dialects the most widely spoken of which is Javanese
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  77% 
male: 
  84% 
female: 
  68% 
Labor force: 
  67 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 55%, manufacturing 10%, construction 4%, transport and
  communications 3% (1985 est.)

@Indonesia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Indonesia 
conventional short form: 
  Indonesia 
local long form: 
  Republik Indonesia 
local short form: 
  Indonesia 
former name: 
  Netherlands East Indies; Dutch East Indies 
Digraph: 
  ID
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Jakarta 
Administrative divisions: 
  24 provinces (propinsi-propinsi, singular - propinsi), 2 special
  regions* (daerah-daerah istimewa, singular - daerah istimewa), and 1
  special capital city district** (daerah khusus ibukota); Aceh*, Bali,
  Bengkulu, Irian Jaya, Jakarta Raya**, Jambi, Jawa Barat, Jawa Tengah,
  Jawa Timur, Kalimantan Barat, Kalimantan Selatan, Kalimantan Tengah,
  Kalimantan Timur, Lampung, Maluku, Nusa Tenggara Barat, Nusa Tenggara
  Timur, Riau, Sulawesi Selatan, Sulawesi Tengah, Sulawesi Tenggara,
  Sulawesi Utara, Sumatera Barat, Sumatera Selatan, Sumatera Utara,
  Timor Timur, Yogyakarta*
Independence: 
  17 August 1945 (proclaimed independence; on 27 December 1949,
  Indonesia became legally independent from the Netherlands)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 17 August (1945) 
Constitution: 
  August 1945, abrogated by Federal Constitution of 1949 and Provisional
  Constitution of 1950, restored 5 July 1959
Legal system: 
  based on Roman-Dutch law, substantially modified by indigenous
  concepts and by new criminal procedures code; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  17 years of age; universal and married persons regardless of age
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Gen. (Ret.) SOEHARTO (since 27 March 1968); Vice President
  Gen. (Ret.) Try SUTRISNO (since 11 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Representatives: 
  (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat or DPR) elections last held on 8 June 1992
  (next to be held NA 1997); results - GOLKAR 68%, PPP 17%, PDI 15%;
  seats - (500 total, 400 elected, 100 military representatives
  appointed) GOLKAR 282, PPP 62, PDI 56
note: 
  the People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat or
  MPR) includes the DPR plus 500 indirectly elected members who meet
  every five years to elect the president and vice president and,
  theoretically, to determine national policy
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Mahkamah Agung) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  GOLKAR (quasi-official party based on functional groups), Lt. Gen.
  (Ret.) HARMOKO, general chairman; Indonesia Democracy Party (PDI -
  federation of former Nationalist and Christian Parties), Megawati
  SUKARNOPUTRI, chairman; Development Unity Party (PPP, federation of
  former Islamic parties), Ismail Hasan METAREUM, chairman
Member of: 
  APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-77, GATT, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC,
  OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOSOM, UNTAC, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Arifin SIREGAR 
chancery: 
  2020 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 775-5200 
FAX: 
  (202) 775-5365 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, New York, and Los Angeles 
consulate(s): 
  San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Robert L. BARRY 
embassy: 
  Medan Merdeka Selatan 5, Box 1, Jakarta 
mailing address: 
  APO AP 96520 
telephone: 
  [62] (21) 360-360 
FAX: 
  [62] (21) 386-2259 
consulate(s): 
  Medan, Surabaya 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white; similar to the flag
  of Monaco, which is shorter; also similar to the flag of Poland, which
  is white (top) and red

@Indonesia, Economy

Overview: 
  Indonesia is a mixed economy with some socialist institutions and
  central planning but with a recent emphasis on deregulation and
  private enterprise. Indonesia has extensive natural wealth, yet, with
  a large and rapidly increasing population, it remains a poor country.
  Real GDP growth in 1985-93 averaged about 6%, quite impressive, but
  not sufficient to both slash underemployment and absorb the 2.3
  million workers annually entering the labor force. Agriculture,
  including forestry and fishing, is an important sector, accounting for
  21% of GDP and over 50% of the labor force. The staple crop is rice.
  Once the world's largest rice importer, Indonesia is now nearly
  self-sufficient. Plantation crops - rubber and palm oil - and textiles
  and plywood are being encouraged for both export and job generation.
  Industrial output now accounts for almost 40% of GDP and is based on a
  supply of diverse natural resources, including crude oil, natural gas,
  timber, metals, and coal. Foreign investment has also boosted
  manufacturing output and exports in recent years. Indeed, the
  economy's growth is highly dependent on the continuing expansion of
  nonoil exports. Japan remains Indonesia's most important customer and
  supplier of aid. Rapid growth in the money supply in 1989-90 prompted
  Jakarta to implement a tight monetary policy in 1991, forcing the
  private sector to go to foreign banks for investment financing. Real
  interest rates remained above 10% and off-shore commercial debt grew.
  The growth in off-shore debt prompted Jakarta to limit foreign
  borrowing beginning in late 1991. Despite the continued problems in
  moving toward a more open financial system and the persistence of a
  fairly tight credit situation, GDP growth in 1992 and 1993 has matched
  the government target of 6%-7% annual growth.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $571 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  10% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  3% official rate; underemployment 45% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $32.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $32.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $12.9 billion (FY95)
Exports: 
  $38.2 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum and gas 28%, clothing and fabrics 15%, plywood 11%, footwear
  4% (1992)
partners: 
  Japan 32%, US 13%, Singapore 9%, South Korea 6% (1992)
Imports: 
  $28.3 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery 37%, semi-finished goods 16%, chemicals 14%, raw materials
  10%, transport equipment 7%, food stuffs 6%, petroleum products 4%,
  consumer goods 3% (1992)
partners: 
  Japan 22%, US 14%, Germany 8%, South Korea 7%, Singapore 6%, Australia
  5%, Taiwan 5% (1992)
External debt: 
  $100 billion (1994 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 11.6% (1989 est.); accounts 35% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  11,600,000 kW
production: 
  38 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  200 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  petroleum and natural gas, textiles, mining, cement, chemical
  fertilizers, plywood, food, rubber
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 21% of GDP; subsistence food production; small-holder and
  plantation production for export; main products are rice, cassava,
  peanuts, rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil, copra, other tropical
  products, poultry, beef, pork, eggs
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug trade, but not
  a major player; government actively eradicating plantings and
  prosecuting traffickers
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $4.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $25.9
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $213 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $175 million 
Currency: 
  1 Indonesian rupiah (Rp) = 100 sen (sen no longer used)
Exchange rates: 
  Indonesian rupiahs (Rp) per US$1 - 2,116.9 (January 1994), 2,087.1
  (1993), 2,029.9 (1992), 1,950.3 (1991), 1,842.8 (1990), 1,770.1 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Indonesia, Communications

Railroads: 
  6,964 km total; 6,389 km 1.067-meter gauge, 497 km 0.750-meter gauge,
  78 km 0.600-meter gauge; 211 km double track; 101 km electrified; all
  government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  119,500 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
undifferentiated: 
  provincial 34,180 km; district 73,508 km; state 11,812 km 
Inland waterways: 
  21,579 km total; Sumatra 5,471 km, Java and Madura 820 km, Kalimantan
  10,460 km, Sulawesi 241 km, Irian Jaya 4,587 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,505 km; petroleum products 456 km; natural gas 1,703 km
  (1989)
Ports: 
  Cilacap, Cirebon, Jakarta, Kupang, Palembang, Ujungpandang, Semarang,
  Surabaya
Merchant marine: 
  430 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,893,830 GRT/2,768,294 DWT,
  bulk 26, cargo 256, chemical tanker 7, container 11, liquefied gas 6,
  livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 83, passenger 4, passenger-cargo 13,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 5, short-sea passenger 7, specialized tanker 7,
  vehicle carrier 4 
Airports: 
total: 
  444 
usable: 
  414 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  122 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  11 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  68 
Telecommunications: 
  interisland microwave system and HF police net; domestic service fair,
  international service good; radiobroadcast coverage good; 763,000
  telephones (1986); broadcast stations - 618 AM, 38 FM, 9 TV; satellite
  earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station and 1 Pacific
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station; and 1 domestic satellite communications
  system

@Indonesia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 54,518,490; fit for military service 32,175,853; reach
  military age (18) annually 2,201,295 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.1 billion, 1.5% of GNP (FY93/94 est.)


@Iran, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, between the Persian Gulf and the Caspian Sea
Map references: 
  Asia, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.648 million sq km 
land area: 
  1.636 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Alaska
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,440 km, Afghanistan 936 km, Armenia 35 km, Azerbaijan (north)
  432 km, Azerbaijan (northwest) 179 km, Iraq 1,458 km, Pakistan 909 km,
  Turkey 499 km, Turkmenistan 992 km 
Coastline: 
  2,440 km 
note: 
  Iran also borders the Caspian Sea (740 km)
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive fishing zone: 
  50 nm in the Gulf of Oman; continental shelf limit, continental shelf
  boundaries, or median lines in the Persian Gulf
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations in 1990 but are still
  trying to work out written agreements settling outstanding disputes
  from their eight-year war concerning border demarcation,
  prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and sovereignty over the
  Shatt al Arab waterway; Iran occupies two islands in the Persian Gulf
  claimed by the UAE: Tunb as Sughra (Arabic), Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Kuchek
  (Persian) or Lesser Tunb, and Tunb al Kubra (Arabic), Jazireh-ye
  Tonb-e Bozorg (Persian) or Greater Tunb; it jointly administers with
  the UAE an island in the Persian Gulf claimed by the UAE, Abu Musa
  (Arabic) or Jazireh-ye Abu Musa (Persian); in 1992 the dispute over
  Abu Musa and the Tunb islands became more acute when Iran unilaterally
  tried to control the entry of third country nationals into the UAE
  portion of Abu Musa island, Tehran subsequently backed off in the face
  of significant diplomatic support for the UAE in the region; periodic
  disputes with Afghanistan over Helmand water rights
Climate: 
  mostly arid or semiarid, subtropical along Caspian coast
Terrain: 
  rugged, mountainous rim; high, central basin with deserts, mountains;
  small, discontinuous plains along both coasts
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper, iron ore, lead,
  manganese, zinc, sulfur 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  27% 
forest and woodland: 
  11% 
other: 
  54% 
Irrigated land: 
  57,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution, especially in urban areas, from vehicle emissions,
  refinery operations, and industry; deforestation; overgrazing;
  desertification; oil pollution in the Persian Gulf; shortages of
  drinking water
natural hazards: 
  periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Life Conservation

@Iran, People

Population: 
  65,615,474 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.46% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  42.43 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.83 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  60.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.66 years 
male: 
  64.7 years 
female: 
  66.68 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Iranian(s) 
adjective: 
  Iranian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Persian 51%, Azerbaijani 24%, Gilaki and Mazandarani 8%, Kurd 7%, Arab
  3%, Lur 2%, Baloch 2%, Turkmen 2%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Shi'a Muslim 95%, Sunni Muslim 4%, Zoroastrian, Jewish, Christian, and
  Baha'i 1% 
Languages: 
  Persian and Persian dialects 58%, Turkic and Turkic dialects 26%,
  Kurdish 9%, Luri 2%, Baloch 1%, Arabic 1%, Turkish 1%, other 2% 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  54% 
male: 
  64% 
female: 
  43% 
Labor force: 
  15.4 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 33%, manufacturing 21%
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor (1988 est.)

@Iran, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Islamic Republic of Iran 
conventional short form: 
  Iran 
local long form: 
  Jomhuri-ye Eslami-ye Iran 
local short form: 
  Iran 
Digraph: 
  IR
Type: 
  theocratic republic 
Capital: 
  Tehran 
Administrative divisions: 
  24 provinces (ostanha, singular - ostan); Azarbayjan-e Bakhtari,
  Azarbayjan-e Khavari, Bakhtaran, Bushehr, Chahar Mahall va Bakhtiari,
  Esfahan, Fars, Gilan, Hamadan, Hormozgan, Ilam, Kerman, Khorasan,
  Khuzestan, Kohkiluyeh va Buyer Ahmadi, Kordestan, Lorestan, Markazi,
  Mazandaran, Semnan, Sistan va Baluchestan, Tehran, Yazd, Zanjan
Independence: 
  1 April 1979 (Islamic Republic of Iran proclaimed)
National holiday: 
  Islamic Republic Day, 1 April (1979) 
Constitution: 
  2-3 December 1979; revised 1989 to expand powers of the presidency and
  eliminate the prime ministership
Legal system: 
  the Constitution codifies Islamic principles of government
Suffrage: 
  15 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
supreme leader and functional chief of state: 
  Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah Ali Hoseini-KHAMENEI (since
  4 June 1989); supreme leader (velayat-e faqih)
head of government: 
  President Ali Akbar Hashemi-RAFSANJANI (since 3 August 1989); election
  last held June 1993 (next to be held June-July 1997); results - Ali
  Akbar HASHEMI-RAFSANJANI was elected with 63% of the vote
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; selected by the president with legislative
  approval
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Islamic Consultative Assembly: 
  (Majles-e-Shura-ye-Eslami) elections last held 8 April 1992 (next to
  be held April 1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats -
  (270 seats total) number of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  there are at least 76 licensed parties; the three most important are -
  Tehran Militant Clergy Association, Mohammad Reza MAHDAVI-KANI;
  Militant Clerics Association, Mehdi MAHDAVI-KARUBI and Mohammad Asqar
  MUSAVI-KHOINIHA; Fedaiyin Islam Organization, Sadeq KHALKHALI
Other political or pressure groups: 
  groups that generally support the Islamic Republic include Hizballah,
  Hojjatiyeh Society, Mojahedin of the Islamic Revolution, Muslim
  Students Following the Line of the Imam; armed political groups that
  have been almost completely repressed by the government include
  Mojahedin-e Khalq Organization (MEK), People's Fedayeen, Kurdish
  Democratic Party; the Society for the Defense of Freedom
Member of: 
  CCC, CP, ESCAP, ECO, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Iran has an Interests Section in the Pakistani Embassy in Washington,
  DC
chancery: 
  Iranian Interests Section, 2209 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 965-4990 
US diplomatic representation: 
  protecting power in Iran is Switzerland
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and red; the
  national emblem (a stylized representation of the word Allah) in red
  is centered in the white band; Allah Alkbar (God is Great) in white
  Arabic script is repeated 11 times along the bottom edge of the green
  band and 11 times along the top edge of the red band

@Iran, Economy

Overview: 
  Iran's economy is a mixture of central planning, state ownership of
  oil and other large enterprises, village agriculture, and small-scale
  private trading and service ventures. Over the past several years, the
  government has introduced several measures to liberalize the economy
  and reduce government intervention, but most of these changes have
  moved slowly because of political opposition. Iran has faced
  increasingly severe financial difficulties in 1992-93 due to an import
  surge since 1989 and general financial mismanagement. At yearend 1993
  the Iranian Government estimated that it owed foreign creditors about
  $30 billion; an estimated $8 billion of this debt was in arrears.
  Earnings from oil exports--which provide over 90% of Iran's export
  revenues--are providing less relief to Iran than usual because of
  declining oil prices. Estimated overall growth was a robust 6.3% in
  1992 and a moderate 3% in 1993.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $303 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,780 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  30% (September 1992-September 1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  30% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $15.5 billion (f.o.b., FY92 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum 90%, carpets, fruits, nuts, hides
partners: 
  Japan, Italy, France, Netherlands, Belgium/Luxembourg, Spain, and
  Germany
Imports: 
  $23.7 billion (c.i.f., FY92 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, military supplies, metal works, foodstuffs,
  pharmaceuticals, technical services, refined oil products
partners: 
  Germany, Japan, Italy, UK, France
External debt: 
  $30 billion (December 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3% (1993 est.); accounts for almost 30% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  15,649,000 kW
production: 
  43.6 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  710 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, petrochemicals, textiles, cement and other building
  materials, food processing (particularly sugar refining and vegetable
  oil production), metal fabricating
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 20% of GDP; principal products - wheat, rice, other
  grains, sugar beets, fruits, nuts, cotton, dairy products, wool,
  caviar; not self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of opium poppy for the domestic and international
  drug trade; net opiate importer but also a key transshipment point for
  Southwest Asian heroin to Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-80), $1 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $1.675 billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $976 million 
note: 
  aid fell sharply following the 1979 revolution
Currency: 
  1 Iranian rial (IR) = 10 tomans
Exchange rates: 
  Iranian rials (IR) per US$1 - 1,748.86 (January 1994), 1,267.77
  (1993), 65.552 (1992), 67.505 (1991); note - in March 1993 the Iranian
  government announced a new single-parity exchange rate system with a
  new official rate of 1,538 rials per dollar; there is also a black
  market rate of 2200 rials per US$1 (December 1993)
Fiscal year: 
  21 March - 20 March

@Iran, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,852 km total; 4,760 km 1.432-meter gauge, 92 km 1.676-meter gauge;
  480 km under construction from Bafq to Bandar-e 'Abbas, rail
  construction from Bafq to Sirjan has been completed and is
  operational; section from Sirjan to Bandar-e 'Abbas still under
  construction
Highways: 
total: 
  140,200 km 
paved: 
  42,694 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 46,866 km; improved earth 49,440 km; unimproved
  earth 1,200 km 
Inland waterways: 
  904 km; the Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime traffic for
  about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3 meters and is in use
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 5,900 km; petroleum products 3,900 km; natural gas 4,550 km 
Ports: 
  Abadan (largely destroyed in fighting during 1980-88 war), Bandar
  Beheshti, Bandar-e 'Abbas, Bandar-e Bushehr, Bandar-e Khomeyni,
  Bandar-e Torkeman (Caspian Sea port), Khorramshahr (repaired after
  being largely destroyed in fighting during 1980-88 war) has been in
  limited operation since November 1992
Merchant marine: 
  139 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,480,000 GRT/8,332,667 DWT,
  bulk 48, cargo 41, chemical tanker 4, combination bulk 2, liquefied
  gas 1, oil tanker 31, refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8,
  short-sea passenger 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  219 
usable: 
  193 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  80 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  17 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  18 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  70 
Telecommunications: 
  microwave radio relay extends throughout country; system centered in
  Tehran; 2,143,000 telephones (35 telephones per 1,000 persons);
  broadcast stations - 77 AM, 3 FM, 28 TV; satellite earth stations - 2
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT; HF radio and
  microwave radio relay to Turkey, Pakistan, Syria, Kuwait, Tajikistan,
  and Uzbekistan; submarine fiber optic cable to UAE

@Iran, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Islamic Republic of Iran Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense
  Force, Revolutionary Guards (including Basij militia and own ground,
  air, and naval forces), Law Enforcement Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 14,382,216; fit for military service 8,555,760; reach
  military age (21) annually 600,630 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  according to official Iranian data, Iran spent 1,785 billion rials,
  including $808 million in hard currency in 1992 and budgeted 2,507
  billion rials, including $850 million in hard currency for 1993 (est.)
note: 
  conversion of rial expenditures into US dollars using the prevailing
  exchange rate could produce misleading results


@Iraq, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, between Iran and Saudi Arabia
Map references: 
  Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  437,072 sq km 
land area: 
  432,162 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Idaho
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,631 km, Iran 1,458 km, Jordan 181 km, Kuwait 242 km, Saudi
  Arabia 814 km, Syria 605 km, Turkey 331 km 
Coastline: 
  58 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations in 1990 but are still
  trying to work out written agreements settling outstanding disputes
  from their eight-year war concerning border demarcation,
  prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and sovereignty over the
  Shatt al Arab waterway; in April 1991 official Iraqi acceptance of UN
  Security Council Resolution 687, which demands that Iraq accept the
  inviolability of the boundary set forth in its 1963 agreement with
  Kuwait, ending earlier claims to Bubiyan and Warbah islands or to all
  of Kuwait; the 20 May 1993 final report of the UN Iraq/Kuwait Boundary
  Demarcation Commission was welcomed by the Security Council in
  Resolution 833 of 27 May 1993, which also reaffirmed that the
  decisions of the commission on the boundary were final, bringing to a
  completion the official demarcation of the Iraq-Kuwait boundary; Iraqi
  officials still refuse to unconditionally recognize Kuwaiti
  sovereignty or the inviolability of the UN demarcated border; periodic
  disputes with upstream riparian Syria over Euphrates water rights;
  potential dispute over water development plans by Turkey for the
  Tigris and Euphrates Rivers
Climate: 
  mostly desert; mild to cool winters with dry, hot, cloudless summers;
  northernmost regions along Iranian and Turkish borders experience cold
  winters with occasionally heavy snows
Terrain: 
  mostly broad plains; reedy marshes in southeast; mountains along
  borders with Iran and Turkey
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, phosphates, sulfur 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  9% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  75% 
Irrigated land: 
  25,500 sq km (1989 est)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  government water control projects drain inhabited marsh areas, drying
  up or diverting the streams and rivers that support a sizable
  population of Shi'a Muslims who have inhabited these areas for
  thousands of years; the destruction of the natural habitat also poses
  serious threats to the wildlife populations; damage to water treatment
  and sewage facilities during Gulf war; inadequate supplies of potable
  water; development of Tigris-Euphrates Rivers system contingent upon
  agreements with upstream riparians (Syria, Turkey); air and water
  pollution; soil degradation (salinization) and erosion;
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified
  - Environmental Modification

@Iraq, People

Population: 
  19,889,666 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.73% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  44.11 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.26 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  67.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.74 years 
male: 
  64.87 years 
female: 
  66.66 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.71 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Iraqi(s) 
adjective: 
  Iraqi 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab 75-80%, Kurdish 15-20%, Turkoman, Assyrian or other 5% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 97% (Shi'a 60-65%, Sunni 32-37%), Christian or other 3% 
Languages: 
  Arabic, Kurdish (official in Kurdish regions), Assyrian, Armenian 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  60% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  49% 
Labor force: 
  4.4 million (1989)
by occupation: 
  services 48%, agriculture 30%, industry 22%
note: 
  severe labor shortage; expatriate labor force was about 1,600,000
  (July 1990); since then, it has declined substantially

@Iraq, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Iraq 
conventional short form: 
  Iraq 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Iraqiyah 
local short form: 
  Al Iraq 
Digraph: 
  IZ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Baghdad 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 provinces (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Anbar, Al Basrah,
  Al Muthanna, Al Qadisiyah, An Najaf, Arbil, As Sulaymaniyah, At
  Ta'mim, Babil, Baghdad, Dahuk, Dhi Qar, Diyala, Karbala', Maysan,
  Ninawa, Salah ad Din, Wasit
Independence: 
  3 October 1932 (from League of Nations mandate under British
  administration)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Revolution, 17 July (1968) 
Constitution: 
  22 September 1968, effective 16 July 1970 (provisional Constitution);
  new constitution drafted in 1990 but not adopted
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law in special religious courts, civil law system
  elsewhere; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President SADDAM Husayn (since 16 July 1979); Vice President Taha
  Muhyi al-Din MARUF (since 21 April 1974); Vice President Taha Yasin
  RAMADAN (since 23 March 1991) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Ahmad Husayn Khudayir al-SAMARRAI (since 5 September
  1993); Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Mikhail AZIZ (since NA 1979) 
Revolutionary Command Council: 
  Chairman SADDAM Husayn, Vice Chairman Izzat IBRAHIM al-Duri 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Majlis al-Watani): 
  elections last held on 1 April 1989 (next to be held NA); results -
  Sunni Arabs 53%, Shi'a Arabs 30%, Kurds 15%, Christians 2% est.; seats
  - (250 total) number of seats by party NA
note: 
  in northern Iraq, a "Kurdish Assembly" was elected in May 1992 and
  calls for Kurdish self-determination within a federated Iraq; the
  assembly is not recognized by the Baghdad government
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Cassation 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Ba'th Party 
Other political or pressure groups: 
  political parties and activity severely restricted; opposition to
  regime from disaffected members of the Baath Party, Army officers, and
  Shi'a religious and ethnic Kurdish dissidents; the Green Party
  (government-controlled)
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-19, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Iraq has an Interest Section in the Algerian Embassy in Washington, DC
chancery: 
  Iraqi Interests Section, 1801 P Street NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-7500 
FAX: 
  (202) 462-5066 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); note - operations have been temporarily suspended; a US
  Interests Section is located in Poland's embassy in Baghdad 
embassy: 
  Masbah Quarter (opposite the Foreign Ministry Club), Baghdad 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 2447 Alwiyah, Baghdad 
telephone: 
  [964] (1) 719-6138 or 719-6139, 718-1840, 719-3791 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black with three
  green five-pointed stars in a horizontal line centered in the white
  band; the phrase ALLAHU AKBAR (God is Great) in green Arabic script -
  Allahu to the right of the middle star and Akbar to the left of the
  middle star - was added in January 1991 during the Persian Gulf
  crisis; similar to the flag of Syria that has two stars but no script
  and the flag of Yemen that has a plain white band; also similar to the
  flag of Egypt that has a symbolic eagle centered in the white band

@Iraq, Economy

Overview: 
  The Ba'thist regime engages in extensive central planning and
  management of industrial production and foreign trade while leaving
  some small-scale industry and services and most agriculture to private
  enterprise. The economy has been dominated by the oil sector, which
  has traditionally provided about 95% of foreign exchange earnings. In
  the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the
  eight-year war with Iran and damage to oil export facilities by Iran,
  led the government to implement austerity measures and to borrow
  heavily and later reschedule foreign debt payments. After the end of
  hostilities in 1988, oil exports gradually increased with the
  construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged facilities.
  Agricultural development remained hampered by labor shortages,
  salinization, and dislocations caused by previous land reform and
  collectivization programs. The industrial sector, although accorded
  high priority by the government, also was under financial constraints.
  Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent international
  economic embargoes, and military action by an international coalition
  beginning in January 1991 drastically changed the economic picture.
  Industrial and transportation facilities suffered severe damage and
  have been only partially restored. Oil exports remain at less than 10%
  of the previous level. Shortages of spare parts continue. Living
  standards deteriorated even further in 1993 and early 1994; consumer
  prices at least tripled in 1993. The UN-sponsored economic embargo has
  reduced exports and imports and has contributed to the sharp rise in
  prices. The government's policies of supporting large military and
  internal security forces and of allocating resources to key supporters
  of the regime have exacerbated shortages. In brief, per capita output
  in 1993-94 is far below the 1989-90 level, but no precise estimate is
  available.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $38 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $2,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  200% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $10.4 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  crude oil and refined products, fertilizer, sulfur
partners: 
  US, Brazil, Turkey, Japan, Netherlands, Spain (1990)
Imports: 
  $6.6 billion (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  manufactures, food
partners: 
  Germany, US, Turkey, France, UK (1990)
External debt: 
  $45 billion (1989 est.), excluding debt of about $35 billion owed to
  Arab Gulf states
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; manufacturing accounts for 10% of GNP (1989)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  7,300,000 kW available out of 9,902,000 kW due to Gulf war
production: 
  12.9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  700 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum production and refining, chemicals, textiles, construction
  materials, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounted for 11% of GNP and 30% of labor force before the Gulf war;
  principal products - wheat, barley, rice, vegetables, dates, other
  fruit, cotton, wool; livestock - cattle, sheep; not self-sufficient in
  food output
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-80), $3 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $647
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $3.9 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Iraqi dinar (ID) = 1,000 fils
Exchange rates: 
  Iraqi dinars (ID) per US$1 - 3.2 (fixed official rate since 1982);
  black-market rate (May 1994) US$1 = 370 Iraqi dinars
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Iraq, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,457 km 1.435-meter standard gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  34,700 km 
paved: 
  17,500 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 5,500 km; unimproved earth 11,700 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,015 km; Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by maritime traffic for
  about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3 meters and is in use;
  Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have navigable sections for shallow-draft
  watercraft; Shatt al Basrah canal was navigable by shallow-draft craft
  before closing in 1991 because of the Persian Gulf war
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 4,350 km; petroleum products 725 km; natural gas 1,360 km 
Ports: 
  Umm Qasr reopened in November 1993; Khawr az Zubayr and Al Basrah have
  been closed since 1980
Merchant marine: 
  37 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 805,205 GRT/1,444,810 DWT, cargo
  15, oil tanker 16, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated cargo
  1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3 
note: 
  none of the Iraqi flag merchant fleet was trading internationally as
  of 1 January 1993
Airports: 
total: 
  118 
usable: 
  105 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  76 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  51 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  17 
Telecommunications: 
  reconstitution of damaged telecommunication facilities began after
  Desert Storm, most damaged facilities have been rebuilt; the network
  consists of coaxial cables and microwave radio relay links; 632,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 16 AM, 1 FM, 13 TV; satellite earth
  stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1
  Atlantic Ocean GORIZONT in the Intersputnik system and 1 ARABSAT;
  coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Jordan, Kuwait, Syria, and
  Turkey, Kuwait line is probably non-operational

@Iraq, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army and Republican Guard, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force, Border
  Guard Force, Internal Security Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,428,193; fit for military service 2,487,319; reach
  military age (18) annually 219,641 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GNP


@Ireland, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, in the North Atlantic Ocean, across the Irish Sea from
  Great Britain
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  70,280 sq km 
land area: 
  68,890 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than West Virginia
Land boundaries: 
  total 360 km, UK 360 km 
Coastline: 
  1,448 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Northern Ireland question with the UK; Rockall continental shelf
  dispute involving Denmark, Iceland, and the UK (Ireland and the UK
  have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area)
Climate: 
  temperate maritime; modified by North Atlantic Current; mild winters,
  cool summers; consistently humid; overcast about half the time
Terrain: 
  mostly level to rolling interior plain surrounded by rugged hills and
  low mountains; sea cliffs on west coast
Natural resources: 
  zinc, lead, natural gas, petroleum, barite, copper, gypsum, limestone,
  dolomite, peat, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  14% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  71% 
forest and woodland: 
  5% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution, especially of lakes, from agricultural runoff
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Environmental Modification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Air
  Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  strategic location on major air and sea routes between North American
  and northern Europe; over 40% of the population resides within 60
  miles of Dublin

@Ireland, People

Population: 
  3,539,296 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.3% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.21 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.59 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.68 years 
male: 
  72.85 years 
female: 
  78.68 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.99 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Irishman(men), Irishwoman(men), Irish (collective plural) 
adjective: 
  Irish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Celtic, English 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 93%, Anglican 3%, none 1%, unknown 2%, other 1% (1981)
Languages: 
  Irish (Gaelic), spoken mainly in areas located along the western
  seaboard, English is the language generally used
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1981 est.)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1.37 million 
by occupation: 
  services 57.0%, manufacturing and construction 28%, agriculture,
  forestry, and fishing 13.5%, energy and mining 1.5% (1992)

@Ireland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Ireland 
Digraph: 
  EI
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Dublin 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 counties; Carlow, Cavan, Clare, Cork, Donegal, Dublin, Galway,
  Kerry, Kildare, Kilkenny, Laois, Leitrim, Limerick, Longford, Louth,
  Mayo, Meath, Monaghan, Offaly, Roscommon, Sligo, Tipperary, Waterford,
  Westmeath, Wexford, Wicklow
Independence: 
  6 December 1921 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Saint Patrick's Day, 17 March 
Constitution: 
  29 December 1937; adopted 1 July 1937 by plebecite
Legal system: 
  based on English common law, substantially modified by indigenous
  concepts; judicial review of legislative acts in Supreme Court; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Mary Bourke ROBINSON (since 9 November 1990); election last
  held 9 November 1990 (next to be held November 1997); results - Mary
  Bourke ROBINSON 52.8%, Brian LENIHAN 47.2%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Albert REYNOLDS (since 11 February 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by president with previous nomination of the prime
  minister and approval of the House of Representatives
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Oireachtas)
Senate (Seanad Eireann): 
  elections last held on NA February 1992 (next to be held February
  1997); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (60 total, 49
  elected) Fianna Fail 26, Fine Gael 16, Labor 9, Progressive Democrats
  2, Democratic Left 1, independents 6
House of Representatives (Dail Eireann): 
  elections last held on 25 November 1992 (next to be held by June
  1995); results - Fianna Fail 39.1%, Fine Gael 24.5%, Labor Party
  19.3%, Progressive Democrats 4.7%, Democratic Left 2.8%, Sinn Fein
  1.6%, Workers' Party 0.7%, independents 5.9%; seats - (166 total)
  Fianna Fail 68, Fine Gael 45, Labor Party 33, Progressive Democrats
  10, Democratic Left 4, Greens 1, independents 5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Left, Proinsias DE ROSSA; Fianna Fail, Albert REYNOLDS;
  Labor Party, Richard SPRING; Fine Gael, John BRUTON; Communist Party
  of Ireland, Michael O'RIORDAN; Sinn Fein, Gerry ADAMS; Progressive
  Democrats, Desmond O'MALLEY
note: 
  Prime Minister REYNOLDS heads a coalition consisting of the Fianna
  Fail and the Labor Party
Member of: 
  Australian Group, BIS, CCC, CE, COCOM (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, EC,
  ECE, EIB, ESA, FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO,
  MTCR, NEA, NSG, OECD, ONUSAL, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP,
  UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNOSOM, UNPROFRO, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WEU
  (observer), WHO, WIPO, WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dermot A. GALLAGHER 
chancery: 
  2234 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-3939 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jean Kennedy SMITH 
embassy: 
  42 Elgin Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [353] (1) 6687122 
FAX: 
  [353] (1) 6689946 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and orange;
  similar to the flag of the Cote d'Ivoire, which is shorter and has the
  colors reversed - orange (hoist side), white, and green; also similar
  to the flag of Italy, which is shorter and has colors of green (hoist
  side), white, and red

@Ireland, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is small and trade dependent. Agriculture, once the most
  important sector, is now dwarfed by industry, which accounts for 37%
  of GDP, about 80% of exports, and employs 28% of the labor force.
  Since 1987, real GDP growth, led by exports, has averaged 4% annually.
  Over the same period, inflation has fallen sharply and chronic trade
  deficits have been transformed into annual surpluses. Unemployment
  remains a serious problem, however, and job creation is the main focus
  of government policy. To ease unemployment, Dublin aggressively courts
  foreign investors and recently created a new industrial development
  agency to aid small indigenous firms. Government assistance is
  constrained by Dublin's continuing deficit reduction measures.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $46.3 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.7% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $13,100 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.7% (1994 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  16% (1994 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $16 billion 
expenditures: 
  $16.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.6 billion (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $28.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  chemicals, data processing equipment, industrial machinery, live
  animals, animal products
partners: 
  EC 75% (UK 32%, Germany 13%, France 10%), US 9%
Imports: 
  $23.3 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  food, animal feed, data processing equipment, petroleum and petroleum
  products, machinery, textiles, clothing
partners: 
  EC 66% (UK 41%, Germany 8%, Netherlands 4%), US 15%
External debt: 
  $17.6 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 11.5% (1992); accounts for 37% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,000,000 kW
production: 
  14.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,120 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food products, brewing, textiles, clothing, chemicals,
  pharmaceuticals, machinery, transportation equipment, glass and
  crystal
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 8% of GDP and 13% of the labor force; principal crops -
  turnips, barley, potatoes, sugar beets, wheat; livestock - meat and
  dairy products; 85% self-sufficient in food; food shortages include
  bread grain, fruits, vegetables
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for hashish from North Africa to the UK and
  Netherlands
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA commitments (1980-89), $90 million 
Currency: 
  1 Irish pound (#Ir) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Irish pounds (#Ir) per US$1 - 0.6978 (January 1994), 0.6816 (1993),
  0.5864 (1992), 0.6190 (1991), 0.6030 (1990), 0.7472 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Ireland, Communications

Railroads: 
  Irish National Railways (CIE) operates 1,947 km 1.602-meter gauge,
  government owned; 485 km double track; 37 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  92,294 km 
paved: 
  87,422 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 4,872 km 
Inland waterways: 
  limited for commercial traffic
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 225 km 
Ports: 
  Cork, Dublin, Waterford
Merchant marine: 
  53 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 139,278 GRT/173,325 DWT, bulk 4,
  cargo 32, chemical tanker 2, container 4, oil tanker 3, refrigerated
  cargo 2, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 3 
Airports: 
total: 
  44 
usable: 
  42 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  14 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  7 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system using cable and digital microwave circuits; 900,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 9 AM, 45 FM, 86 TV; 2 coaxial
  submarine cables; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Ireland, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (including Naval Service and Air Corps), National Police (Garda
  Siochana) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 914,052; fit for military service 739,288; reach
  military age (17) annually 33,809 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $500 million, 1.3% of GDP (1993)


@Israel

Header
Affiliation: 
  (also see separate Gaza Strip and West Bank entries) 
Note: 
  The territories occupied by Israel since the 1967 war are not included
  in the data below. In keeping with the framework established at the
  Madrid Conference in October 1991, bilateral negotiations are being
  conducted between Israel and Palestinian representatives, Syria, and
  Jordan to determine the final status of the occupied territories. On
  25 April 1982, Israel withdrew from the Sinai pursuant to the 1979
  Israel-Egypt Peace treaty.

@Israel, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, bordering the eastern Mediterranean Sea, between Egypt
  and Lebanon
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  20,770 sq km 
land area: 
  20,330 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,006 km, Egypt 255 km, Gaza Strip 51 km, Jordan 238 km, Lebanon
  79 km, Syria 76 km, West Bank 307 km 
Coastline: 
  273 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  separated from Lebanon, Syria, and the West Bank by the 1949 Armistice
  Line; differences with Jordan over the location of the 1949 Armistice
  Line that separates the two countries; the Gaza Strip and Jericho,
  formerly occupied by Israel, are now administered by the Palestinian
  Authority; other areas of the West Bank outside Jericho are Israeli
  occupied; Golan Heights is Israeli occupied; Israeli troops in
  southern Lebanon since June 1982; water-sharing issues with Jordan
Climate: 
  temperate; hot and dry in southern and eastern desert areas
Terrain: 
  Negev desert in the south; low coastal plain; central mountains;
  Jordan Rift Valley
Natural resources: 
  copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay, sand, sulfur, asphalt,
  manganese, small amounts of natural gas and crude oil 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  17% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  40% 
forest and woodland: 
  6% 
other: 
  32% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,140 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  limited arable land and freshwater resources pose serious constraints;
  deforestation; air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions;
  groundwater pollution from industrial and domestic waste, chemical
  fertilizers, and pesticides
natural hazards: 
  sandstorms may occur during spring and summer
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Climate
  Change, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  there are 200 Jewish settlements and civilian land use sites in the
  West Bank, 40 in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, 24 in the Gaza
  Strip, and 25 in East Jerusalem (April 1994)

@Israel, People

Population: 
  5,050,850 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  includes 110,500 Jewish settlers in the West Bank, 14,000 in the
  Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, 4,500 in the Gaza Strip, and 144,100
  in East Jerusalem (1994 est.)
Population growth rate: 
  2.22% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  20.55 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.43 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  8.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.96 years 
male: 
  75.86 years 
female: 
  80.16 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Israeli(s) 
adjective: 
  Israeli 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Jewish 83%, non-Jewish 17% (mostly Arab)
Religions: 
  Judaism 82%, Islam 14% (mostly Sunni Muslim), Christian 2%, Druze and
  other 2% 
Languages: 
  Hebrew (official), Arabic used officially for Arab minority, English
  most commonly used foreign language
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1983)
total population: 
  92% 
male: 
  95% 
female: 
  89% 
Labor force: 
  1.9 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  public services 29.3%, industry 22.1%, commerce 13.9%, finance and
  business 10.4%, personal and other services 7.4%, construction 6.5%,
  transport, storage, and communications 6.3%, agriculture, forestry,
  and fishing 3.5%, other 0.6% (1992)

@Israel, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  State of Israel 
conventional short form: 
  Israel 
local long form: 
  Medinat Yisra'el 
local short form: 
  Yisra'el 
Digraph: 
  IS
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Jerusalem 
note: 
  Israel proclaimed Jerusalem its capital in 1950, but the US, like
  nearly all other countries, maintains its Embassy in Tel Aviv
Administrative divisions: 
  6 districts (mehozot, singular - mehoz); Central, Haifa, Jerusalem,
  Northern, Southern, Tel Aviv
Independence: 
  14 May 1948 (from League of Nations mandate under British
  administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 14 May 1948 (Israel declared independence on 14 May
  1948, but the Jewish calendar is lunar and the holiday may occur in
  April or May)
Constitution: 
  no formal constitution; some of the functions of a constitution are
  filled by the Declaration of Establishment (1948), the basic laws of
  the parliament (Knesset), and the Israeli citizenship law
Legal system: 
  mixture of English common law, British Mandate regulations, and, in
  personal matters, Jewish, Christian, and Muslim legal systems; in
  December 1985, Israel informed the UN Secretariat that it would no
  longer accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Ezer WEIZMAN (since 13 May 1993) election last held 24 March
  1993 (next to be held NA March 1999); results - Ezer WEIZMAN elected
  by Knesset
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Yitzhak RABIN (since NA July 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; selected from and approved by the Knesset
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
parliament (Knesset): 
  elections last held NA June 1992 (next to be held by NA 1996); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (120 total) Labor Party 44,
  Likud bloc 32, Meretz 12, Tzomet 8, National Religious Party 6, Shas
  6, United Torah Jewry 4, Democratic Front for Peace and Equality
  (Hadash) 3, Moledet 3, Arab Democratic Party 2; note - in 1994 three
  new parties were formed, Yi'ud (from Tzomet), Histadrut List (from the
  Labor Party), and Peace Guard (from Moledet), resulting in the
  following new distribution of seats - Labor Party 41, Likud bloc 32,
  Meretz 12, National Religious Party 6, Shas 6, Tzomet 5, United Torah
  Jewry 4, Democratic Front for Peace and Equality (Hadash) 3, Yi'ud 3,
  Histadrut List 3, Moledet 2, Arab Democratic Party 2, Peace Guard 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
members of the government: 
  Labor Party, Prime Minister Yitzhak RABIN; MERETZ, Minister of
  Communications Shulamit ALONI
not in coalition, but voting with the government: 
  SHAS, Arieh DERI; Democratic Front for Peace and Equality (Hadash),
  Hashim MAHAMID; Arab Democratic Party, Abd al Wahab DARAWSHAH;
  Histadrut List, Haim RAMON
opposition parties: 
  Likud Party, Binyamin NETANYAHU; Tzomet, Rafael EITAN; National
  Religious Party, Zevulun HAMMER; United Torah Jewry, Avraham SHAPIRA;
  Moledet, Rehavam ZEEVI; Yi'ud, Gonen SEGEV; Peace Guard, Shoul GUTMAN
note: 
  Israel currently has a coalition government comprising 3 parties that
  hold 56 seats of the Knesset's 120 seats
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Gush Emunim, Jewish nationalists advocating Jewish settlement on the
  West Bank and Gaza Strip; Peace Now, critical of government's West
  Bank/Gaza Strip and Lebanon policies
Member of: 
  AG (observer), CCC, CE (observer), CERN (oberver), EBRD, ECE, FAO,
  GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, OAS (observer),
  PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Itamar RABINOVICH 
chancery: 
  3514 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 364-5500 
FAX: 
  (202) 364-5610 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York,
  Philadelphia, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward DJEREJIAN (expected to resign in August 1994) 
embassy: 
  71 Hayarkon Street, Tel Aviv 
mailing address: 
  PSC 98, Box 100, Tel Aviv; APO AE 09830 
telephone: 
  [972] (3) 517-4338 
FAX: 
  [972] (3) 663-449 
Flag: 
  white with a blue hexagram (six-pointed linear star) known as the
  Magen David (Shield of David) centered between two equal horizontal
  blue bands near the top and bottom edges of the flag

@Israel, Economy

Overview: 
  Israel has a market economy with substantial government participation.
  It depends on imports of crude oil, grains, raw materials, and
  military equipment. Despite limited natural resources, Israel has
  intensively developed its agricultural and industrial sectors over the
  past 20 years. Industry employs about 22% of Israeli workers,
  construction 6.5%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 3.5%, and
  services most of the rest. Diamonds, high-technology equipment, and
  agricultural products (fruits and vegetables) are leading exports.
  Israel usually posts current account deficits, which are covered by
  large transfer payments from abroad and by foreign loans. Roughly half
  of the government's external debt is owed to the United States, which
  is its major source of economic and military aid. To earn needed
  foreign exchange, Israel has been targeting high-technology niches in
  international markets, such as medical scanning equipment. The influx
  of Jewish immigrants from the former USSR, which topped 450,000 during
  the period 1990-93, increased unemployment, intensified housing
  problems, and strained the government budget. At the same time, the
  immigrants bring to the economy valuable scientific and professional
  expertise. Economic problems have eased as immigration has declined,
  but activity has slowed as the economy shifts from housing to
  export-driven growth.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $65.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $13,350 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11.3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  10.4% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $33.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $36.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $9.4 billion (FY93)
Exports: 
  $14.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, cut diamonds, chemicals, textiles and
  apparel, agricultural products, metals
partners: 
  US, EC, Japan
Imports: 
  $20.3 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  military equipment, investment goods, rough diamonds, oil, other
  productive inputs, consumer goods
partners: 
  US, EC
External debt: 
  $24.8 billion (December 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.5% (1993 est.); accounts for about 30% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,835,000 kW
production: 
  21.84 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,600 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, diamond cutting and polishing, textiles and apparel,
  chemicals, metal products, military equipment, transport equipment,
  electrical equipment, miscellaneous machinery, potash mining,
  high-technology electronics, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 7% of GDP; largely self-sufficient in food
  production, except for grains; principal products - citrus and other
  fruits, vegetables, cotton; livestock products - beef, dairy, poultry
Illicit drugs: 
  increasingly concerned about cocaine and heroin abuse and trafficking
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $18.2 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2.8
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot
Exchange rates: 
  new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1 - 2.9760 (February 1994), 2.8301
  (1993), 2.4591 (1992), 2.2791 (1991), 2.0162 (1990), 1.9164 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

@Israel, Communications

Railroads: 
  600 km 1.435-meter gauge, single track; diesel operated
Highways: 
total: 
  13,300 km 
paved: 
  13,300 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 708 km; petroleum products 290 km; natural gas 89 km 
Ports: 
  Ashdod, Haifa
Merchant marine: 
  33 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 637,097 GRT/737,762 DWT, cargo
  8, container 22, refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
note: 
  Israel also maintains a significant flag of convenience fleet, which
  is normally at least as large as the Israeli flag fleet; the Israeli
  flag of convenience fleet typically includes all of its oil tankers
Airports: 
total: 
  55 
usable: 
  48 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  30 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  13 
Telecommunications: 
  most highly developed in the Middle East although not the largest;
  good system of coaxial cable and microwave radio relay; 1,800,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 14 AM, 21 FM, 20 TV; 3 submarine
  cables; satellite earth stations - 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT

@Israel, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Israel Defense Forces (including ground, naval, and air components)
note: 
  historically, there have been no separate Israeli military services
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,257,345; females age 15-49 1,280,899; males fit for
  military service 1,026,699; females fit for military service
  1,049,998; males reach military age (18) annually 47,297 (1994 est.);
  females reach military age (18) annually 45,214 (1994 est.); both
  sexes are liable for military service
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $12.5 billion, 18% of GDP (1993)


@Italy, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Europe, a peninsula extending into the central Mediterranean
  Sea
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  301,230 sq km 
land area: 
  294,020 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Arizona
note: 
  includes Sardinia and Sicily
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,899.2 km, Austria 430 km, France 488 km, Holy See (Vatican
  City) 3.2 km, San Marino 39 km, Slovenia 199 km, Switzerland 740 km 
Coastline: 
  4,996 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  predominantly Mediterranean; Alpine in far north; hot, dry in south
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged and mountainous; some plains, coastal lowlands
Natural resources: 
  mercury, potash, marble, sulfur, dwindling natural gas and crude oil
  reserves, fish, coal 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  32% 
permanent crops: 
  10% 
meadows and pastures: 
  17% 
forest and woodland: 
  22% 
other: 
  19% 
Irrigated land: 
  31,000 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from industrial emissions such as sulfur dioxide;
  coastal and inland rivers polluted from industrial and agricultural
  effluents; acid rain damaging lakes
natural hazards: 
  regional risks include landslides, mudflows, avalanches, earthquakes,
  volcanic eruptions, flooding; land subsidence in Venice
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands;
  signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of
  the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location dominating central Mediterranean as well as
  southern sea and air approaches to Western Europe

@Italy, People

Population: 
  58,138,394 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.21% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  10.79 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.71 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.64 years 
male: 
  74.44 years 
female: 
  81.04 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.39 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Italian(s) 
adjective: 
  Italian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Italian (includes small clusters of German-, French-, and
  Slovene-Italians in the north and Albanian-Italians and Greek-Italians
  in the south), Sicilians, Sardinians 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 98%, other 2% 
Languages: 
  Italian, German (parts of Trentino-Alto Adige region are predominantly
  German speaking), French (small French-speaking minority in Valle
  d'Aosta region), Slovene (Slovene-speaking minority in the
  Trieste-Gorizia area)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  96% 
Labor force: 
  23.988 million 
by occupation: 
  services 58%, industry 32.2%, agriculture 9.8% (1988)

@Italy, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Italian Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Italy 
local long form: 
  Repubblica Italiana 
local short form: 
  Italia 
former: 
  Kingdom of Italy 
Digraph: 
  IT
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Rome 
Administrative divisions: 
  20 regions (regioni, singular - regione); Abruzzi, Basilicata,
  Calabria, Campania, Emilia-Romagna, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Lazio,
  Liguria, Lombardia, Marche, Molise, Piemonte, Puglia, Sardegna,
  Sicilia, Toscana, Trentino-Alto Adige, Umbria, Valle d'Aosta, Veneto
Independence: 
  17 March 1861 (Kingdom of Italy proclaimed)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Republic, 2 June (1946) 
Constitution: 
  1 January 1948
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system, with ecclesiastical law influence; appeals
  treated as trials de novo; judicial review under certain conditions in
  Constitutional Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age, universal (except in senatorial elections, where
  minimum age is 25)
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Oscar Luigi SCALFARO (since 28 May 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Silvio BERLUSCONI (since 11 May 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Parlamento)
Senate (Senato della Repubblica): 
  elections last held 27-28 March 1994 (next expected to be held by
  spring 2001); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (326
  total; 315 elected, 11 appointed senators-for-life) PDS 61, Northern
  League 60, National Alliance 48, Forza Italia 36, Popular Party 31,
  Communist Refounding 18, Greens and The Network 13, Socialist Party
  13, Christian Democratic Center 12, Democratic Alliance 8, Christian
  Socialists 5, Pact for Italy 4, Radical Party 1, others 5
Chamber of Deputies (Camera dei Deputati): 
  elections last held 27-28 March 1994 (next expected to be held by
  spring 2001); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (630
  total) Northern League 117, PDS 114, Forza Italia 113, National
  Alliance 109, Communist Refounding 39, Christian Democratic Center 33,
  Popular Party 33, Greens and The Network 20, Democratic Alliance 18,
  Socialist Party 16, Pact for Italy 13, Christian Socialists 5
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court (Corte Costituzionale) 
Political parties and leaders: 
Rightists: 
  Forza Italia, Silvio BERLUSCONI; National Alliance (was Italian Social
  Movement - MSI - until January 1994), Gianfranco FINI, party
  secretary; Lega Nord (Northern League), Umberto BOSSI, president
Leftists: 
  Democratic Party of the Left (PDS - was Communist Party, or PCI, until
  January 1991), Achille OCCHETTO, secretary; Communist Refounding,
  Fausto BERTINOTTI; Greens, Carlo RIPA di MEARA; Radical Party, Marco
  PANNELLA; Italian Socialist Party, Ottaviano DELTURCO; The Network,
  Leoluca ORLANDO; Christian Socialists, Ermanno GORRIERI
Centrists: 
  Pact for Italy, Mario SEGNI; Popular Party, Rosa JERVOLINO; Christian
  Democratic Center, Pier Ferdinando CASINI
Other political or pressure groups: 
  the Roman Catholic Church; three major trade union confederations
  (CGIL - formerly Communist dominated, CISL - Christian Democratic, and
  UIL - Social Democratic, Socialist, and Republican); Italian
  manufacturers and merchants associations (Confindustria,
  Confcommercio); organized farm groups (Confcoltivatori,
  Confagricoltura)
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), Australia Group, AsDB, BIS, CCC, CDB
  (non-regional), CE, CEI, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECE, ECLAC, EIB,
  ESA, FAO, G-7, G-10, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IEA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG,
  OAS (observer), OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMOGIP, UNOSOM, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Boris BIANCHERI-CHIAPPORI 
chancery: 
  1601 Fuller Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 328-5500 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia,
  San Francisco 
consulate(s): 
  Detroit, New Orleans, and Newark (New Jersey) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Reginald BARTHOLOMEW 
embassy: 
  Via Veneto 119/A, 00187-Rome 
mailing address: 
  PSC 59, Box 100, Rome; APO AE 09624 
telephone: 
  [39] (6) 46741 
FAX: 
  [39] (6) 488-2672 
consulate(s) general: 
  Florence, Milan, Naples 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and red;
  similar to the flag of Ireland, which is longer and is green (hoist
  side), white, and orange; also similar to the flag of the Cote
  d'Ivoire, which has the colors reversed - orange (hoist side), white,
  and green

@Italy, Economy

Overview: 
  Since World War II the Italian economy has changed from one based on
  agriculture into a ranking industrial economy, with approximately the
  same total and per capita output as France and the UK. The country is
  still divided into a developed industrial north, dominated by private
  companies, and an undeveloped agricultural south, dominated by large
  public enterprises. Services account for 48% of GDP, industry 35%,
  agriculture 4%, and public administration 13%. Most raw materials
  needed by industry and over 75% of energy requirements must be
  imported. After growing at an annual average rate of 3% in 1983-90,
  growth slowed to about 1% in 1991 and 1992 and fell by 0.7% in 1993.
  In the second half of 1992, Rome became unsettled by the prospect of
  not qualifying to participate in EC plans for economic and monetary
  union later in the decade; thus it finally began to address its huge
  fiscal imbalances. Thanks to the determination of Prime Ministers
  AMATO and CIAMPI, the government adopted a fairly stringent budget for
  1993 and 1994, abandoned its highly inflationary wage indexation
  system, and started to scale back its extremely generous social
  welfare programs, including pension and health care benefits. Monetary
  officials were forced to withdraw the lira from the European monetary
  system in September 1992 when it came under extreme pressure in
  currency markets. For the 1990s, Italy faces the problems of
  refurbishing a tottering communications system, curbing pollution in
  major industrial centers, and adjusting to the new competitive forces
  accompanying the ongoing economic integration of the European Union.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $967.6 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.7% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $16,700 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.2% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  11.3% (January 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $302 billion 
expenditures: 
  $391 billion, including capital expenditures of $48 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $178.2 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  metals, textiles and clothing, production machinery, motor vehicles,
  transportation equipment, chemicals, other
partners: 
  EC 58.3%, US 6.8%, OPEC 5.1% (1992)
Imports: 
  $188.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  industrial machinery, chemicals, transport equipment, petroleum,
  metals, food, agricultural products
partners: 
  EC 58.8%, OPEC 6.1%, US 5.5% (1992)
External debt: 
  $67 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2.8% (1993 est.); accounts for almost 35% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  58,000,000 kW
production: 
  235 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,060 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  machinery, iron and steel, chemicals, food processing, textiles, motor
  vehicles, clothing, footwear, ceramics
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 4% of GDP and about 9.8% of the work force;
  self-sufficient in foods other than meat, dairy products, and cereals;
  principal crops - fruits, vegetables, grapes, potatoes, sugar beets,
  soybeans, grain, olives; fish catch of 525,000 metric tons in 1990
Illicit drugs: 
  important gateway country for Latin American cocaine and Southwest
  Asian heroin entering the European market
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89),  $25.9 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Italian lira (Lit) = 100 centesimi
Exchange rates: 
  Italian lire (Lit) per US$1 - 1,700.2 (January 1994), 1,573.7 (1993),
  1,232.4 (1992), 1,240.6 (1991), 1,198.1 (1990), 1,372.1 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Italy, Communications

Railroads: 
  20,011 km total; 16,066 km 1.435-meter government-owned standard gauge
  (8,999 km electrified); 3,945 km privately owned - 2,100 km
  1.435-meter standard gauge (1,155 km electrified) and 1,845 km
  0.950-meter narrow gauge (380 km electrified)
Highways: 
total: 
  298,000 km 
paved: 
  270,000 km (including nearly 7,000 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 23,000 km; earth 5,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  2,400 km for various types of commercial traffic, although of limited
  overall value
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,703 km; petroleum products 2,148 km; natural gas 19,400 km
Ports: 
  Cagliari (Sardinia), Genoa, La Spezia, Livorno, Naples, Palermo
  (Sicily), Taranto, Trieste, Venice
Merchant marine: 
  474 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,055,779 GRT/8,924,779 DWT,
  bulk 50, cargo 72, chemical tanker 34, combination bulk 1, combination
  ore/oil 5, container 20, liquefied gas 39, multifunction large-load
  carrier 1, oil tanker 129, passenger 8, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 62, short-sea passenger 34, specialized tanker
  10, vehicle carrier 7 
Airports: 
total: 
  137 
usable: 
  132 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  92 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  36 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  39 
Telecommunications: 
  modern, well-developed, fast; 25,600,000 telephones; fully automated
  telephone, telex, and data services; high-capacity cable and microwave
  radio relay trunks; broadcast stations - 135 AM, 28 (1,840 repeaters)
  FM, 83 (1,000 repeaters) TV; international service by 21 submarine
  cables, 3 satellite earth stations operating in INTELSAT with 3
  Atlantic Ocean antennas and 2 Indian Ocean antennas; also participates
  in INMARSAT and EUTELSAT systems

@Italy, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Carabinieri 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 14,921,411; fit for military service 12,982,445; reach
  military age (18) annually 403,017 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $16.1 billion, 1.3% of GDP (1992)


@Jamaica, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the northern Caribbean Sea, about 160 km south of Cuba
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, North America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  10,990 sq km 
land area: 
  10,830 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,022 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; temperate interior
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with narrow, discontinuous coastal plain
Natural resources: 
  bauxite, gypsum, limestone 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  19% 
permanent crops: 
  6% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  28% 
other: 
  29% 
Irrigated land: 
  350 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; water pollution
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes (especially July to November)
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but
  not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  strategic location between Cayman Trench and Jamaica Channel, the main
  sea lanes for Panama Canal

@Jamaica, People

Population: 
  2,555,064 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.02% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  21.69 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.62 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -5.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  16.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.36 years 
male: 
  72.16 years 
female: 
  76.68 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.41 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Jamaican(s) 
adjective: 
  Jamaican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 76.3%, Afro-European 15.1%, East Indian and Afro-East Indian
  3%, white 3.2%, Chinese and Afro-Chinese 1.2%, other 1.2% 
Religions: 
  Protestant 55.9% (Church of God 18.4%, Baptist 10%, Anglican 7.1%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist 6.9%, Pentecostal 5.2%, Methodist 3.1%, United
  Church 2.7%, other 2.5%), Roman Catholic 5%, other, including some
  spiritual cults 39.1% (1982)
Languages: 
  English, Creole 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1990 est.)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  1,062,100 
by occupation: 
  services 41%, agriculture 22.5%, industry 19%, unemployed 17.5% (1989)

@Jamaica, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Jamaica 
Digraph: 
  JM
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Kingston 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 parishes; Clarendon, Hanover, Kingston, Manchester, Portland, Saint
  Andrew, Saint Ann, Saint Catherine, Saint Elizabeth, Saint James,
  Saint Mary, Saint Thomas, Trelawny, Westmoreland
Independence: 
  6 August 1962 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day (first Monday in August) (1962) 
Constitution: 
  6 August 1962
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Sir Howard COOKE (since 1 August 1991) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister P. J. PATTERSON (since 30 March 1992); Deputy Prime
  Minister Seymour MULLINGS (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  consists of a 21-member body appointed by the governor general
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 30 March 1993 (next to be held by February 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (60 total) PNP 52, JLP
  8
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's National Party (PNP) P. J. PATTERSON; Jamaica Labor Party
  (JLP), Edward SEAGA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Rastafarians (black religious/racial cultists, pan-Africanists); New
  Beginnings Movement (NBM)
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-19, G-77, GATT, G-15, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ISO, ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard Leighton BERNAL 
chancery: 
  Suite 355, 1850 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20006 
telephone: 
  (202) 452-0660 
FAX: 
  (202) 452-0081 
consulate(s) general: 
  Miami and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Lacy A. WRIGHT, Jr. 
embassy: 
  Jamaica Mutual Life Center, 2 Oxford Road, 3rd floor, Kingston 
mailing address: 
  use Embassy street address 
telephone: 
  (809) 929-4850 through 4859 
FAX: 
  (809) 926-6743 
Flag: 
  diagonal yellow cross divides the flag into four triangles - green
  (top and bottom) and black (hoist side and fly side)

@Jamaica, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on sugar, bauxite, and tourism. In September
  1988, Hurricane Gilbert inflicted severe damage on crops and the
  electric power system, a sharp but temporary setback to the economy.
  By October 1989 the economic recovery from the hurricane was largely
  complete, and real growth was up to about 3% for 1989. In 1991,
  however, growth dropped to 0.2% as a result of the US recession, lower
  world bauxite prices, and monetary instability. In 1992, growth was
  1.2%, supported by a recovery in tourism and stabilization of the
  Jamaican dollar in the second half of 1992.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $8 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.2% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,200 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  30% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15.4% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $600 million 
expenditures: 
  $736 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY91 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  alumina, bauxite, sugar, bananas, rum
partners: 
  US 40%, UK 14%, Germany 10%, Canada 10%, Norway 7%
Imports: 
  $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  fuel, other raw materials, construction materials, food, transport
  equipment, other machinery and equipment
partners: 
  US 53%, UK 5%, Venezuela 6%, Germany 5%, Japan 4.0%
External debt: 
  $4.5 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2% (1990); accounts for almost 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,127,000 kW
production: 
  2.736 trillion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,090 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, bauxite mining, textiles, food processing, light manufactures
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 7% of GDP, 23% of work force, and 17% of exports;
  commercial crops - sugarcane, bananas, coffee, citrus, potatoes,
  vegetables; livestock and livestock products include poultry, goats,
  milk; not self-sufficient in grain, meat, and dairy products
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine from Central and South America to
  North America and Europe; illicit cultivation of cannabis; government
  has an active cannabis eradication program
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.2 billion; other
  countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.6 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Jamaican dollar (J$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Jamaican dollars (J$) per US$1 -32.758 (31 December 1993), 22.960
  (1992), 12.116 (1991), 7.184 (1990), 5.7446 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Jamaica, Communications

Railroads: 
  370 km, all 1.435-meter standard gauge, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  18,200 km 
paved: 
  12,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 3,200 km; improved earth 2,400 km 
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 10 km 
Ports: 
  Kingston, Montego Bay, Port Antonio
Merchant marine: 
  4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 9,618 GRT/16,215 DWT, bulk 2, oil
  tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  40 
usable: 
  27 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  fully automatic domestic telephone network; 127,000 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 10 AM, 17 FM, 8 TV; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  earth stations; 3 coaxial submarine cables

@Jamaica, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Jamaica Defense Force (including Ground Forces, Coast Guard and Air
  Wing), Jamaica Constabulary Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 664,122; fit for military service 469,982; reach
  military age (18) annually 26,103 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $19.3 million, 1% of GDP (FY91/92)


@Jan Mayen

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Norway) 

@Jan Mayen, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe, in the North Atlantic Ocean, north of
  the Arctic Circle about 590 km north-northeast of Iceland, between the
  Greenland Sea and the Norwegian Sea
Map references: 
  Arctic Region 
Area: 
total area: 
  373 sq km 
land area: 
  373 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  124.1 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  10 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  4 nm
International disputes: 
  dispute between Denmark and Norway over maritime boundary in Arctic
  Ocean between Greenland and Jan Mayen has been settled by the
  International Court of Justice
Climate: 
  arctic maritime with frequent storms and persistent fog
Terrain: 
  volcanic island, partly covered by glaciers; Beerenberg is the highest
  peak, with an elevation of 2,277 meters
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  volcanic activity resumed in 1970
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  barren volcanic island with some moss and grass

@Jan Mayen, People

Population: 
  no permanent inhabitants; note - there are personnel who man the LORAN
  C base and the weather and coastal services radio station

@Jan Mayen, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Jan Mayen 
Digraph: 
  JN
Type: 
  territory of Norway 
Capital: 
  none; administered from Oslo, Norway, through a governor (sysselmann)
  resident in Longyearbyen (Svalbard)
Independence: 
  none (territory of Norway)

@Jan Mayen, Economy

Overview: 
  Jan Mayen is a volcanic island with no exploitable natural resources.
  Economic activity is limited to providing services for employees of
  Norway's radio and meteorological stations located on the island.
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  15,000 kW
production: 
  40 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  NA (1992)

@Jan Mayen, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  radio and meteorological station

@Jan Mayen, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Norway


@Japan, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, off the southeast coast of Russia and east of the Korean
  peninsula
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  377,835 sq km 
land area: 
  374,744 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than California
note: 
  includes Bonin Islands (Ogasawara-gunto), Daito-shoto, Minami-jima,
  Okinotori-shima, Ryukyu Islands (Nansei-shoto), and Volcano Islands
  (Kazan-retto)
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  29,751 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm; 3 nm in the international straits - La Perouse or Soya,
  Tsugaru, Osumi, and Eastern and Western Channels of the Korea or
  Tsushima Strait
International disputes: 
  islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, Shikotau, and the Habomai group
  occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, now administered by Russia,
  claimed by Japan; Liancourt Rocks disputed with South Korea;
  Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands) claimed by China and Taiwan
Climate: 
  varies from tropical in south to cool temperate in north
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged and mountainous
Natural resources: 
  negligible mineral resources, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  13% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  67% 
other: 
  18% 
Irrigated land: 
  28,680 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from power plant emissions results in acid rain;
  acidification of lakes and reservoirs degrading water quality and
  threatening aquatic life
natural hazards: 
  many dormant and some active volcanoes; about 1,500 seismic
  occurrences (mostly tremors) every year; subject to tsunamis
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location in northeast Asia

@Japan, People

Population: 
  125,106,937 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.32% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  10.49 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.31 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  4.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  79.31 years 
male: 
  76.47 years 
female: 
  82.28 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.55 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Japanese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Japanese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Japanese 99.4%, other 0.6% (mostly Korean)
Religions: 
  observe both Shinto and Buddhist 84%, other 16% (including 0.7%
  Christian)
Languages: 
  Japanese 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1970 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  63.33 million 
by occupation: 
  trade and services 54%, manufacturing, mining, and construction 33%,
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 7%, government 3% (1988)

@Japan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Japan 
Digraph: 
  JA
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Tokyo 
Administrative divisions: 
  47 prefectures; Aichi, Akita, Aomori, Chiba, Ehime, Fukui, Fukuoka,
  Fukushima, Gifu, Gumma, Hiroshima, Hokkaido, Hyogo, Ibaraki, Ishikawa,
  Iwate, Kagawa, Kagoshima, Kanagawa, Kochi, Kumamoto, Kyoto, Mie,
  Miyagi, Miyazaki, Nagano, Nagasaki, Nara, Niigata, Oita, Okayama,
  Okinawa, Osaka, Saga, Saitama, Shiga, Shimane, Shizuoka, Tochigi,
  Tokushima, Tokyo, Tottori, Toyama, Wakayama, Yamagata, Yamaguchi,
  Yamanashi
Independence: 
  660 BC (traditional founding by Emperor Jimmu)
National holiday: 
  Birthday of the Emperor, 23 December (1933) 
Constitution: 
  3 May 1947
Legal system: 
  modeled after European civil law system with English-American
  influence; judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Emperor AKIHITO (since 7 January 1989) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Tsutomu HATA (since 25 April 1994); Deputy Prime
  Minister (vacant) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Diet (Kokkai)
House of Councillors (Sangi-in): 
  elections last held on 26 July 1992 (next to be held NA July 1995);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (252 total) LDP 95,
  SDPJ 68, Shin Ryoku fu-Kai 37, CGP 24, JCP 11, other 17
House of Representatives (Shugi-in): 
  elections last held on 18 July 1993 (next to be held by NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (511 total) LDP 206, SDPJ 74,
  Shinseito 62, CGP 52, JNP 37, DSP 19, JCP 15, Sakigake 15, others 19,
  independents 10, vacant 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), Yohei KONO, president; Yoshiro MORI,
  secretary general; Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ), Tomiichi
  MURAYAMA; Democratic Socialist Party (DSP), Keigo OUCHI, chairman;
  Japan Communist Party (JCP), Tetsuzo FUWA, Presidium chairman; Komeito
  (Clean Government Party, CGP), Koshiro ISHIDA, chairman; Japan New
  Party (JNP), Morihiro HOSOKAWA, chairman; Shinseito (Japan Renewal
  Party, JRP), Tsutomu HATA, chairman; Ichiro OZAWA, secretary general;
  Sakigake (Harbinger), Masayoshi TAKEMURA, chairman; Mirai (Future
  Party), Michihiko KANO, chairman; The Liberal Party, Koji KAKIZAWA,
  chairman
note: 
  Shin Ryoku fu-Kai is a new, upper house only, parliamentary alliance
  which includes the JRP, JNP, DSP, and a minor labor group
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), Australia Group, APEC, AsDB, BIS, CCC, COCOM, CP,
  CSCE (observer), EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, G-2, G-5, G-7, G-8, G-10, GATT,
  IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, MTCR, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNRWA, UNTAC, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Takakazu KURIYAMA 
chancery: 
  2520 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-6700 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-2187 
consulate(s) general: 
  Agana (Guam), Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, Honolulu,
  Houston, Kansas City (Missouri), Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New
  York, Portland (Oregon), San Francisco, and Seattle 
consulate(s): 
  Saipan (Northern Mariana Islands) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Walter F. MONDALE 
embassy: 
  10-5, Akasaka 1-chome, Minato-ku (107), Tokyo 
mailing address: 
  Unit 45004, Box 258, Tokyo; APO AP 96337-0001 
telephone: 
  [81] (3) 3224-5000 
FAX: 
  [81] (3) 3505-1862 
consulate(s) general: 
  Naha (Okinawa), Osaka-Kobe, Sapporo 
consulate(s): 
  Fukuoka 
Flag: 
  white with a large red disk (representing the sun without rays) in the
  center

@Japan, Economy

Overview: 
  Government-industry cooperation, a strong work ethic, mastery of high
  technology, and a comparatively small defense allocation have helped
  Japan advance with extraordinary rapidity to the rank of second most
  powerful economy in the world. Industry, the most important sector of
  the economy, is heavily dependent on imported raw materials and fuels.
  Self-sufficient in rice, Japan must import about 50% of its
  requirements of other grain and fodder crops. Japan maintains one of
  the world's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly 15% of the
  global catch. Overall economic growth has been spectacular: a 10%
  average in the 1960s, a 5% average in the 1970s and 1980s. Economic
  growth came to a halt in 1992-93 largely because of contractionary
  domestic policies intended to wring speculative excesses from the
  stock and real estate markets. At the same time, the stronger yen and
  slower global growth are containing export growth. Unemployment and
  inflation remain remarkably low in comparison with the other
  industrialized nations. Japan continues to run a huge trade surplus -
  $120 billion in 1993, up more than 10% from the year earlier - which
  supports extensive investment in foreign assets. The new prime
  minister HATA in early 1994 reiterated previous governments' vows of
  administrative and economic reform, including reduction in the trade
  surplus, but his weak coalition government faces strong resistance
  from traditional interest groups. The crowding of the habitable land
  area and the aging of the population are two major long-run problems.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.549 trillion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  0% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $20,400 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.3% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.5% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $490 billion 
expenditures: 
  $579 billion, including capital expenditures (public works only) of
  about $68 billion (FY93)
Exports: 
  $360.9 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  manufactures 97% (including machinery 46%, motor vehicles 20%,
  consumer electronics 10%)
partners: 
  Southeast Asia 33%, US 29%, Western Europe 18%, China 5%
Imports: 
  $240.7 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  manufactures 52%, fossil fuels 20%, foodstuffs and raw materials 28%
partners: 
  Southeast Asia 25%, US 23%, Western Europe 15%, China 9%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -4% (1993); accounts for 30% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  196,000,000 kW
production: 
  835 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,700 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  steel and non-ferrous metallurgy, heavy electrical equipment,
  construction and mining equipment, motor vehicles and parts,
  electronic and telecommunication equipment and components, machine
  tools and automated production systems, locomotives and railroad
  rolling stock, shipbuilding, chemicals, textiles, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for only 2% of GDP; highly subsidized and protected sector,
  with crop yields among highest in world; principal crops - rice, sugar
  beets, vegetables, fruit; animal products include pork, poultry, dairy
  and eggs; about 50% self-sufficient in food production; shortages of
  wheat, corn, soybeans; world's largest fish catch of 10 million metric
  tons in 1991
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-93), $123 billion 
note: 
  ODA outlay of $9.9 billion in 1994 (est.)
Currency: 
  yen (Y)
Exchange rates: 
  yen (Y) per US$1 - 111.51 (January 1994), 111.20 (1993), 126.65
  (1992), 134.71 (1991), 144.79 (1990), 137.96 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Japan, Communications

Railroads: 
  27,327 km total; 2,012 km 1.435-meter standard gauge and 25,315 km
  predominantly 1.067-meter narrow gauge; 5,724 km doubletrack and
  multitrack sections, 9,038 km 1.067-meter narrow-gauge electrified,
  2,012 km 1.435-meter standard-gauge electrified (1987)
Highways: 
total: 
  1,115,609 km 
paved: 
  782,042 km (including 4,869 km of national expressways)
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, or earth 333,567 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  about 1,770 km; seagoing craft ply all coastal inland seas
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 84 km; petroleum products 322 km; natural gas 1,800 km 
Ports: 
  Chiba, Muroran, Kitakyushu, Kobe, Tomakomai, Nagoya, Osaka, Tokyo,
  Yokkaichi, Yokohama, Kawasaki, Niigata, Fushiki-Toyama, Shimizu,
  Himeji, Wakayama-Shimozu, Shimonoseki, Tokuyama-Shimomatsu
Merchant marine: 
  926 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 20,383,101 GRT31,007,515 DWT,
  bulk 225, cargo 76, chemical tanker 9, combination ore/oil 9,
  container 44, liquefied gas 42, multi-function large load carrier 1,
  oil tanker 265, passenger 10, passenger cargo 3, refrigerated cargo
  66, roll-on/roll-off cargo 44, short-sea passenger 36, specialized
  tanker 2, vehicle carrier 94 
note: 
  Japan also owns a large flag of convenience fleet, including up to 38%
  of the total number of ships under the Panamanian flag
Airports: 
total: 
  167 
usable: 
  165 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  137 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  34 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  52 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent domestic and international service; 64,000,000 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 318 AM, 58 FM, 12,350 TV (196 major - 1 kw or
  greater); satellite earth stations - 4 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT and 1
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT; submarine cables to US (via Guam), Philippines,
  China, and Russia

@Japan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (Army), Japan Maritime Self-Defense
  Force (Navy), Japan Air Self-Defense Force (Air Force), Maritime
  Safety Agency (Coast Guard) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 32,044,032; fit for military service 27,597,444; reach
  military age (18) annually 953,928 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $45.5 billion, less than 1% of GDP (FY94/95
  est.)


@Jarvis Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Jarvis Island, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the South Pacific Ocean, 2,090 km south of
  Honolulu, just south of the Equator, about halfway between Hawaii and
  the Cook Islands
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  4.5 sq km 
land area: 
  4.5 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 7.5 times the size of the Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  8 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun
Terrain: 
  sandy, coral island surrounded by a narrow fringing reef
Natural resources: 
  guano (deposits worked until late 1800s) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lacks fresh water
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  sparse bunch grass, prostrate vines, and low-growing shrubs; primarily
  a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds,
  and marine wildlife; feral cats

@Jarvis Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited; note - Millersville settlement on western side of island
  occasionally used as a weather station from 1935 until World War II,
  when it was abandoned; reoccupied in 1957 during the International
  Geophysical Year by scientists who left in 1958; public entry is by
  special-use permit only and generally restricted to scientists and
  educators

@Jarvis Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Jarvis Island 
Digraph: 
  DQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the Fish and
  Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the
  National Wildlife Refuge System
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC

@Jarvis Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Jarvis Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only - one boat landing area in the middle of
  the west coast and another near the southwest corner of the island
Note: 
  there is a day beacon near the middle of the west coast

@Jarvis Island, Defense Forces

  defense is the responsibility of the US; visited annually by the US
  Coast Guard


@Jersey

Header

Affiliation: 
  (British crown dependency) 

@Jersey, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, 27 km from France in the English Channel
Map references: 
  Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  117 sq km 
land area: 
  117 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  70 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; mild winters and cool summers
Terrain: 
  gently rolling plain with low, rugged hills along north coast
Natural resources: 
  agricultural land 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  57% 
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  largest and southernmost of Channel Islands; about 30% of population
  concentrated in Saint Helier

@Jersey, People

Population: 
  86,048 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.7% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.81 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.1 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  4.25 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  4.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.64 years 
male: 
  73.54 years 
female: 
  80.09 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.43 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Channel Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Channel Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  UK and Norman-French descent
Religions: 
  Anglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Congregational New Church,
  Methodist, Presbyterian 
Languages: 
  English (official), French (official), Norman-French dialect spoken in
  country districts
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA 

@Jersey, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Bailiwick of Jersey 
conventional short form: 
  Jersey 
Digraph: 
  JE
Type: 
  British crown dependency 
Capital: 
  Saint Helier 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (British crown dependency)
Independence: 
  none (British crown dependency)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 9 May (1945) 
Constitution: 
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and practice
Legal system: 
  English law and local statute
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
Chief of State: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
Head of Government: 
  Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief Air Marshal Sir John SUTTON
  (since NA 1990); Bailiff Sir Peter L. CRILL (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  committees; appointed by the States
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Assembly of the States: 
  elections last held NA (next to be held NA); results - no percent of
  vote by party since all are independents; seats - (56 total, 52
  elected) 52 independents
Judicial branch: 
  Royal Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none; all independents
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (British crown dependency)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (British crown dependency)
Flag: 
  white with the diagonal red cross of Saint Patrick (patron saint of
  Ireland) extending to the corners of the flag

@Jersey, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based largely on financial services, agriculture, and
  tourism. Potatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes, and especially flowers are
  important export crops, shipped mostly to the UK. The Jersey breed of
  dairy cattle is known worldwide and represents an important export
  earner. Milk products go to the UK and other EU countries. In 1986 the
  finance sector overtook tourism as the main contributor to GDP,
  accounting for 40% of the island's output. In recent years the
  government has encouraged light industry to locate in Jersey, with the
  result that an electronics industry has developed alongside the
  traditional manufacturing of knitwear. All raw material and energy
  requirements are imported, as well as a large share of Jersey's food
  needs.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  8% (1987 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  8% (1988 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $308 million 
expenditures: 
  $284.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1985)
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  light industrial and electrical goods, foodstuffs, textiles
partners: 
  UK
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods, foodstuffs,
  mineral fuels, chemicals
partners: 
  UK
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  50,000 kW standby
production: 
  power supplied by France
consumption per capita: 
  NA (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, banking and finance, dairy
Agriculture: 
  potatoes, cauliflowers, tomatoes; dairy and cattle farming
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Jersey pound (#J) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Jersey pounds (#J) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6658 (1993),
  0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989); the Jersey
  pound is at par with the British pound
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Jersey, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Saint Helier, Gorey, Saint Aubin
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  63,700 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 3 submarine
  cables

@Jersey, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Johnston Atoll

Header

Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Johnston Atoll, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 1,430 km
  west-southwest of Honolulu, about one-third of the way between Hawaii
  and the Marshall Islands
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  2.8 sq km 
land area: 
  2.8 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 4.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  10 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, but generally dry; consistent northeast trade winds with
  little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  mostly flat with a maximum elevation of 4 meters
Natural resources: 
  guano (deposits worked until about 1890) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean; Johnston Island and
  Sand Island are natural islands; North Island (Akau) and East Island
  (Hikina) are manmade islands formed from coral dredging; closed to the
  public; former nuclear weapons test site; site of Johnston Atoll
  Chemical Agent Disposal System (JACADS); some low-growing vegetation

@Johnston Atoll, People

Population: 
  327 (July 1994 est.) 

@Johnston Atoll, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Johnston Atoll 
Digraph: 
  JQ
Type: 
  unincorportated territory of the US administered by the US Defense
  Nuclear Agency (DNA) and managed cooperatively by DNA and the Fish and
  Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the
  National Wildlife Refuge system
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of the US)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of the US)
Flag: 
  the flag of the US is used

@Johnston Atoll, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is limited to providing services to US military
  personnel and contractors located on the island. All food and
  manufactured goods must be imported.
Electricity: 
  supplied by the management and operations contractor

@Johnston Atoll, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 with TACAN and beacon
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent system including 60-channel submarine cable, Autodin/SRT
  terminal, digital telephone switch, Military Affiliated Radio System
  (MARS station), commercial satellite television system, and UHF/VHF
  air-ground radio

@Johnston Atoll, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Jordan

Header
Affiliation: 
  (also see separate West Bank entry) 

@Jordan, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, between Israel and Saudi Arabia
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  89,213 sq km 
land area: 
  88,884 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Indiana
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,619 km, Iraq 181 km, Israel 238 km, Saudi Arabia 728 km, Syria
  375 km, West Bank 97 km 
Coastline: 
  26 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  differences with Israel over the location of the 1949 Armistice Line
  that separates the two countries; water-sharing issues with Israel
Climate: 
  mostly arid desert; rainy season in west (November to April)
Terrain: 
  mostly desert plateau in east, highland area in west; Great Rift
  Valley separates East and West Banks of the Jordan River
Natural resources: 
  phosphates, potash, shale oil 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  0.5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  0.5% 
other: 
  94% 
Irrigated land: 
  570 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lack of adequate natural water resources; deforestation; overgrazing;
  soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
  Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands

@Jordan, People

Population: 
  3,961,194 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.5% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  38.77 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.22 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.47 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  32.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.85 years 
male: 
  70.04 years 
female: 
  73.77 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.64 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Jordanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Jordanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab 98%, Circassian 1%, Armenian 1% 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 92%, Christian 8% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), English widely understood among upper and middle
  classes
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  80% 
male: 
  89% 
female: 
  70% 
Labor force: 
  600,000 (1992)
by occupation: 
  industry 11.4%, commerce, restaurants, and hotels 10.5%, construction
  10.0%, transport and communications 8.7%, agriculture 7.4%, other
  services 52.0% (1992)

@Jordan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan 
conventional short form: 
  Jordan 
local long form: 
  Al Mamlakah al Urduniyah al Hashimiyah 
local short form: 
  Al Urdun 
former: 
  Transjordan 
Digraph: 
  JO
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Amman 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Balqa', Al Karak,
  Al Mafraq, 'Amman, At Tafilah, Az Zarqa', Irbid, Ma'an
Independence: 
  25 May 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under British
  administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 25 May (1946) 
Constitution: 
  8 January 1952
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law and French codes; judicial review of legislative
  acts in a specially provided High Tribunal; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King HUSSEIN Bin Talal Al Hashimi (since 11 August 1952) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Abd al-Salam al-MAJALI (since May 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet appointed by the monarch
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly (Majlis al-'Umma)
House of Notables (Majlis al-A'ayan): 
  consists of a 40-member body appointed by the king from designated
  categories of public figures
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 8 November 1993 (next to be held NA November
  1997); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (80 total)
  Muslim Brotherhood (fundamentalist) 16, Independent Islamic bloc
  (generally traditionalist) 6, Radical leftist 3, pro-government 55
note: 
  the House of Representatives has been convened and dissolved by the
  King several times since 1974 and in November 1989 the first
  parliamentary elections in 22 years were held
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Cassation 
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA; note - political parties were legalized in December 1992
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC, PCA,
  UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UNRWA, UNPROFOR, UNTAC,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Fayiz A. TARAWNAH 
chancery: 
  3504 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 966-2664 
FAX: 
  (202) 966-3110 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Wesley EGAN, Jr. 
embassy: 
  Jabel Amman, Amman 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 354, Amman, or APO AE 09892-0200 
telephone: 
  [962] (6) 820-101 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), white, and green with a
  red isosceles triangle based on the hoist side bearing a small white
  seven-pointed star; the seven points on the star represent the seven
  fundamental laws of the Koran

@Jordan, Economy

Overview: 
  Jordan benefited from increased Arab aid during the oil boom of the
  late 1970s and early 1980s, when its annual real GNP growth averaged
  more than 10%. In the remainder of the 1980s, however, reductions in
  both Arab aid and worker remittances slowed real economic growth to an
  average of roughly 2% per year. Imports - mainly oil, capital goods,
  consumer durables, and food - outstripped exports, with the difference
  covered by aid, remittances, and borrowing. In mid-1989, the Jordanian
  Government began debt-rescheduling negotiations and agreed to
  implement an IMF-supported program designed to gradually reduce the
  budget deficit and implement badly needed structural reforms. The
  Persian Gulf crisis that began in August 1990, however, aggravated
  Jordan's already serious economic problems, forcing the government to
  shelve the IMF program, stop most debt payments, and suspend
  rescheduling negotiations. Aid from Gulf Arab states, worker
  remittances and trade contracted, and refugees flooded the country,
  producing serious balance-of-payments problems, stunting GDP growth,
  and straining government resources. The economy rebounded in 1992,
  largely due to the influx of capital repatriated by workers returning
  from the Gulf, but the recovery has been losing steam since mid-1993.
  The government is implementing the reform program adopted in 1992 and
  continues to secure rescheduling of its heavy foreign debt.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $11.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  20% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.7 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $420 million (1993)
Exports: 
  $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  phosphates, fertilizers, potash, agricultural products, manufactures
partners: 
  India, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, EC, Indonesia, UAE
Imports: 
  $3.2 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil, machinery, transport equipment, food, live animals,
  manufactured goods
partners: 
  EC, US, Iraq, Japan, Turkey
External debt: 
  $6.8 billion (December 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3% (1993 est.); accounts for 20% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,030,000 kW
production: 
  3.814 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,070 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  phosphate mining, petroleum refining, cement, potash, light
  manufacturing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 10% of GDP; principal products are wheat, barley,
  citrus fruit, tomatoes, melons, olives; livestock - sheep, goats,
  poultry; large net importer of food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.7 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.5
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $9.5 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $44 million 
Currency: 
  1 Jordanian dinar (JD) = 1,000 fils
Exchange rates: 
  Jordanian dinars (JD) per US$1 - 0.7019 (February 1994), 0.6928
  (1993), 0.6797 (1992), 0.6808 (1991), 0.6636 (1990), 0.5704 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Jordan, Communications

Railroads: 
  789 km 1.050-meter gauge, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  7,500 km 
paved: 
  asphalt 5,500 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 2,000 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 209 km 
Ports: 
  Al 'Aqabah
Merchant marine: 
  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 71,566 GRT/129,351 DWT, bulk 1,
  cargo 1, oil tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  16 
usable: 
  14 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  13 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  12 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate telephone system of microwave, cable, and radio links; 81,500
  telephones; broadcast stations - 5 AM, 7 FM, 8 TV; satellite earth
  stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1
  ARABSAT, 1 domestic TV receive-only; coaxial cable and microwave to
  Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Syria; microwave link to Lebanon is inactive;
  participant in MEDARABTEL, a microwave radio relay network linking
  Syria, Jordan, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco

@Jordan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Jordanian Armed Forces (JAF) includes Royal Jordanian Land Force,
  Royal Jordanian Air Force, Royal Naval Force; Ministry of the
  Interior's Public Security Force (falls under JAF only in wartime or
  crisis situations)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 966,420; fit for military service 685,112; reach
  military age (18) annually 42,776 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $435 million, 7.9% of GDP (1993)


@Juan de Nova Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (possession of France) 

@Juan de Nova Island, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the central Mozambique Channel about one-third of
  the way between Madagascar and Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa 
Area: 
total area: 
  4.4 sq km 
land area: 
  4.4 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 7.5 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  24.1 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Madagascar
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  NA
Natural resources: 
  guano deposits and other fertilizers 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  90% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to periodic cyclones
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  wildlife sanctuary

@Juan de Nova Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Juan de Nova Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Juan de Nova Island 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ile Juan de Nova 
Digraph: 
  JU
Type: 
  French possession administered by Commissioner of the Republic,
  resident in Reunion
Capital: 
  none; administered by France from Reunion
Independence: 
  none (possession of France)

@Juan de Nova Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Juan de Nova Island, Communications

Railroads: 
  short line going to a jetty
Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,439-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 

@Juan de Nova Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Kazakhstan, Geography

Location: 
  Central Asia, between Russia and Uzbekistan, bordering on the Caspian
  Sea and the Aral Sea
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian States,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,717,300 sq km 
land area: 
  2,669,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than four times the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 12,012 km, China 1,533 km, Kyrgyzstan 1,051 km, Russia 6,846 km,
  Turkmenistan 379 km, Uzbekistan 2,203 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km 
note: 
  Kazakhstan borders the Aral Sea (1,015 km) and the Caspian Sea (1,894
  km)
Maritime claims: 
  landlocked, but borders with Russia, Azerbaijan, and Turkmenistan in
  the Caspian Sea are under negotiation at present
International disputes: 
  Russia may dispute current de facto maritime border to midpoint of
  Caspian Sea from shore
Climate: 
  continental, cold winters and hot summers, arid and semiarid
Terrain: 
  extends from the Volga to the Altai Mountains and from the plains in
  western Siberia to oasis and desert in Central Asia
Natural resources: 
  major deposits of petroleum, coal, iron ore, manganese, chrome ore,
  nickel, cobalt, copper, molybdenum, lead, zinc, bauxite, gold, uranium
Land use: 
arable land: 
  15% 
permanent crops: 
  NEGL %
meadows and pastures: 
  57% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  24% 
Irrigated land: 
  23,080 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  radioactive or toxic chemical sites associated with its former defense
  industries and test ranges are found throughout the country and pose
  health risks for humans and animals; industrial pollution is severe in
  some cities; because the two main rivers which flowed into the Aral
  Sea have been diverted for irrigation, it is drying up and leaving
  behind a harmful layer of chemical pesticides and natural salts; these
  substances are then picked up by the wind and blown into noxious dust
  storms; pollution in the Caspian Sea; soil pollution from overuse of
  agricultural chemicals and salinization from faulty irrigation
  practices
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  landlocked

@Kazakhstan, People

Population: 
  17,267,554 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.64% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.4 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.93 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -5.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  40.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.04 years 
male: 
  63.39 years 
female: 
  72.93 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.44 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Kazakhstani(s) 
adjective: 
  Kazakhstani 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Kazakh (Qazaq) 41.9%, Russian 37%, Ukrainian 5.2%, German 4.7%, Uzbek
  2.1%, Tatar 2%, other 7.1% (1991 official data)
Religions: 
  Muslim 47%, Russian Orthodox 44%, Protestant 2%, other 7% 
Languages: 
  Kazakh (Qazaqz) official language spoken by over 40% of population,
  Russian (language of interethnic communication) spoken by two-thirds
  of population and used in everyday business
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  7.356 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 31%, agriculture and forestry 26%, other 43%
  (1992)

@Kazakhstan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Kazakhstan 
conventional short form: 
  Kazakhstan 
local long form: 
  Kazakhstan Respublikasy 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  KZ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Almaty 
Administrative divisions: 
  19 oblystar (singular - oblys) and 1 city (qalalar, singular - qala)*;
  Almaty*, Almaty Oblysy, Aqmola Oblysy, Aqtobe Oblysy, Atyrau Oblysy,
  Batys Qazaqstan Oblysy (Oral), Kokshetau Oblysy, Mangghystau Oblysy,
  Ongtustik Qazaqstan Oblysy (Shymkent), Qaraghandy Oblysy, Qostanay
  Oblysy, Qyzylorda Oblysy, Pavlodar Oblysy, Semey Oblysy, Shyghys
  Qazaqstan Oblysy (Oskemen; formerly Ust'-Kamenogorsk), Soltustik
  Qazaqstan Oblysy (Petropavl), Taldyqorghan Oblysy, Torghay Oblysy,
  Zhambyl Oblysy, Zhezqazghan Oblysy
note: 
  names in parentheses are administrative centers when name differs from
  oblys name
Independence: 
  16 December 1991 (from the Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 16 December (1991) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 28 January 1993
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV (since NA April 1990); Vice
  President Yerik ASANBAYEV (since 1 December 1991); election last held
  1 December 1991 (next to be held NA 1995); percent of vote by party
  NA; Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV ran unopposed
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Sergey TERESHCHENKO (since 14 October 1991); First
  Deputy Prime Minister Arkezhan KAZHEGELDIN (since NA November 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme Council: 
  elections last held 7 March 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (177 total) Union Peoples' Unity
  of Kazakhstan 33, Federation of Trade Unions of the Republic of
  Kazakhstan 11, People's Congress of Kazakhstan Party 9, Socialist
  Party of Kazakhstan 8, Peasant Union of the Republic Kazakhstan 4,
  Social Movement "LAD" 4, Organization of Veterans 1, Union of Youth of
  Kazakhstan 1, Democratic Committee for Human Rights 1, Association of
  Lawyers of Kazakhstan 1, International Public Committee
  "Aral-Asia-Kazakhstan" 1, Congress of Entrepreneurs of Kazakhstan 1,
  Deputies of the 12th Supreme Soviet 40, independents 62
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Peoples Unity Movement (PUU), Kuanysh SULTANOV, chairman; Peoples
  Congress, Olzhas SULEYMENOV, chairman; Kazakhstan Socialist Party
  (SPK; former Communist Party), Piotr SVOIK, co-chairman; Republican
  Party (Azat), Kamal ORMANTAYEV, chairman; Democratic Progress
  (Russian) Party, Alexandra DOKUCHAYEVA, chairman; Union Peoples' Unity
  of Kazakhstan (SNEK); Federation of Trade Unions of the Republic of
  Kazakhstan; Peasant Union of the Republic Kazakhstan; Social Movement
  LAD (Slavic Rebirth Society), V. MIKHAYLOV, chairman; Union of Youth
  of Kazakhstan; Democratic Committee for Human Rights; Association of
  Lawyers of Kazakhstan; International Public Committee
  "Aral-Asia-Kazakhstan"; Congress of Entrepreneurs of Kazakhstan;
  Deputies of the 12th Supreme Soviet
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Independent Trade Union Center (Birlesu; an association of independent
  trade union and business associations), Leonid SOLOMIN, president
Member of: 
  CCC, CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECO, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOD, NACC, OIC (observer), UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Tuleutai SULEYMENOV 
chancery: 
  3421 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 333-4504/7 
FAX: 
  (202) 333-4509 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William H. COURTNEY 
embassy: 
  99/97 Furmanova Street, Almaty, Republic of Kazakhstan 480012 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy Almaty, c/o Department of State, Washington, DC,
  20521-7030 
telephone: 
  (7) (3272) 63-17-70, 63-24-26, 63-28-80, 63-34-05 
FAX: 
  (7) (3272) 63-38-83 
Flag: 
  sky blue background representing the endless sky and a gold sun with
  32 rays soaring above a golden steppe eagle in the center; on the
  hoist side is a "national ornamentation" in yellow

@Kazakhstan, Economy

Overview: 
  Kazakhstan, the second largest of the former Soviet states in
  territory, possesses vast oil, coal, rare metals, and agricultural
  resources. While the economy is gradually making the transition from a
  Soviet command system to a market system, strong elements of state
  control persist including government ownership of most economic assets
  and a continued system of mandatory state procurement for the key
  products such as grain and energy; likewise, agriculture remains
  largely collectivized. On the other hand, new businesses are forming
  rapidly, the economy is opening to foreign investment, and 12% of
  state-owned commercial enterprises have been privatized. In 1993, a
  three-year industrial privatization program was launched; an
  independent currency was successfully introduced; and two large joint
  ventures were established with western oil companies. These
  far-reaching structural transformations have resulted in a cumulative
  decline in national income of more than 30% since 1990. Loose monetary
  policies have kept the inflation rate high, averaging 28% per month
  for 1993 and accelerating at the end with the disruption caused by a
  new currency. Since the introduction of its independent currency in
  November 1993, the government has renewed its commitment to fiscal
  discipline and accelerating economic reform. However, growing economic
  hardship and rising ethnic tensions between Kazakhs and Russians over
  the division of economic assets will likely lead to strong pressure to
  backtrack.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $60.3 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Kazakhstani statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -13% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,510 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  28% per month (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  0.6% includes only officially registered unemployed; also large
  numbers of underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $1.76 billion (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.3 billion to outside the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  oil, ferrous and nonferrous metals, chemicals, grain, wool, meat
  (1992)
partners: 
  Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan
Imports: 
  $358.3 million from outside the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and parts, industrial materials, oil and gas (1992)
partners: 
  Russia and other former Soviet republics, China
External debt: 
  $1.5 billion debt to Russia
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -16% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  19,135,000 kW
production: 
  81.3 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,739 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  extractive industries (oil, coal, iron ore, manganese, chromite, lead,
  zinc, copper, titanium, bauxite, gold, silver, phosphates, sulfur),
  iron and steel, nonferrous metal, tractors and other agricultural
  machinery, electric motors, construction materials
Agriculture: 
  accounts for almost 40% of net material product; employs about 26% of
  the labor force; grain, mostly spring wheat; meat, cotton, wool
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for CIS
  consumption; limited government eradication program; used as
  transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western Europe and North
  America from Central and Southwest Asia
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  approximately $1 billion in foreign credits to become available in
  1994
Currency: 
  national currency the tenge introduced on 15 November 1993
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Kazakhstan, Communications

Railroads: 
  14,460 km (all 1.520-meter gauge); does not include industrial lines
  (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  189,000 km 
paved and graveled: 
  108,100 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 80,900 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  Syrdariya River, Ertis River
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,850 km; refined products 1,500 km; natural gas 3,480 km
  (1992)
Ports: 
  inland - Atyrau (formerly Gur'yev; on Caspian Sea)
Airports: 
total: 
  365 
usable: 
  152 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  49 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  8 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  38 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  71 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone service is poor, with only about 17 telephones for each 100
  persons in urban areas and 7.6 telephones per 100 persons in rural
  areas; of the approximately 2.2 million telephones, Almaty has
  184,000; broadcast receivers - TVs 4,750,000, radios 4,088,000, radio
  receiver systems with multiple speakers for program diffusion
  6,082,000; international traffic with other former USSR republics and
  China carried by landline and microwave, and with other countries by
  satellite and through 8 international telecommunications circuits at
  the Moscow international gateway switch; satellite earth stations -
  INTELSAT and Orbita (TV receive only); new satellite ground station
  established at Almaty with Turkish financial help (December 1992) with
  2500 channel band width

@Kazakhstan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, National Guard, Security Forces (internal and border troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,432,716; fit for military service 3,554,209; reach
  military age (18) annually 154,989 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  69,326 million rubles, NA% of GDP (forecast for 1993); note -
  conversion of the military budget into US dollars using the current
  exchange rate could produce misleading results


@Kenya, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, bordering the northwestern India Ocean between
  Tanzania and Somalia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  582,650 sq km 
land area: 
  569,250 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Nevada
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,446 km, Ethiopia 830 km, Somalia 682 km, Sudan 232 km,
  Tanzania 769 km, Uganda 933 km 
Coastline: 
  536 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  administrative boundary with Sudan does not coincide with
  international boundary; possible claim by Somalia based on unification
  of ethnic Somalis
Climate: 
  varies from tropical along coast to arid in interior
Terrain: 
  low plains rise to central highlands bisected by Great Rift Valley;
  fertile plateau in west
Natural resources: 
  gold, limestone, soda ash, salt barytes, rubies, fluorspar, garnets,
  wildlife 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  85% 
Irrigated land: 
  520 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from urban and industrial wastes; degradation of water
  quality from increased use of pesticides and fertilizers;
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; poaching
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change
Note: 
  the Kenyan Highlands comprise one of the most successful agricultural
  production regions in Africa; glaciers on Mt. Kenya; unique
  physiography supports abundant and varied wildlife of scientific and
  economic value

@Kenya, People

Population: 
  28,240,658 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.07% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  42.44 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.74 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  74.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  53.23 years 
male: 
  51.48 years 
female: 
  55.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.91 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Kenyan(s) 
adjective: 
  Kenyan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Kikuyu 22%, Luhya 14%, Luo 13%, Kalenjin 12%, Kamba 11%, Kisii 6%,
  Meru 6%, Asian, European, and Arab 1%, other 15% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 28%, Protestant (including Anglican) 26%, indigenous
  beliefs 18%, Muslim 6% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Swahili (official), numerous indigenous languages
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  69% 
male: 
  80% 
female: 
  58% 
Labor force: 
  9.2 million (includes unemployed); the total employed is 1,370,000
  (14.8% of the labor force)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 75-80% (1993 est.), non-agriculture 20-25% (1993 est.)

@Kenya, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Kenya 
conventional short form: 
  Kenya 
former: 
  British East Africa 
Digraph: 
  KE
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Nairobi 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 provinces; Central, Coast, Eastern, Nairobi, North Eastern, Nyanza,
  Rift Valley, Western
Independence: 
  12 December 1963 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 12 December (1963) 
Constitution: 
  12 December 1963, amended as a republic 1964; reissued with amendments
  1979, 1983, 1986, 1988, 1991, and 1992
Legal system: 
  based on English common law, tribal law, and Islamic law; judicial
  review in High Court; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations; constitutional amendment of 1982 making Kenya a de jure
  one-party state repealed in 1991
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Daniel Teroitich arap MOI (since 14 October 1978); Vice
  President George SAITOTI (since 10 May 1989); election last held on 29
  December 1992 (next to be held NA 1997); results - President Daniel T.
  arap MOI was reelected with 37% of the vote; Kenneth Matiba
  (FORD-ASILI) 26%; Mwai Kibaki (SP) 19%, Oginga Odinga (FORD-Kenya) 17%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Bunge): 
  elections last held on 29 December 1992; results - (188 total) KANU
  100, FORD-Kenya 31, FORD-Asili 31, DP 23, smaller parties 3; president
  nominates 12 additional members
note: 
  first multiparty election since repeal of one-party state law in 1991
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  ruling party is Kenya African National Union (KANU), Daniel T. arap
  MOI, president; opposition parties include Forum for the Restoration
  of Democracy (FORD-Kenya), Michael WAMALWA; Forum for the Restoration
  of Democracy (FORD-Asili), Kenneth MATIBA; Democratic Party of Kenya
  (DP), Mwai KIBAKI; Kenya National Congress (KNC), Titus MBATHI; Kenya
  Social Congress (KSC), George ANYONA; Kenya National Democratic
  Alliance (KENYA), Mukara NG'ANG'A; Party for Independent Candidates of
  Kenya (PKK), Otieno OTOERA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  labor unions; Roman Catholic Church
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNIKOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
chancery: 
  2249 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 387-6101 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Aurelia BRAZEAL   
embassy: 
  corner of Moi Avenue and Haile Selassie Avenue, Nairobi 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 30137, Unit 64100, Nairobi or APO AE 09831 
telephone: 
  [254] (2) 334141 
FAX: 
  [254] (2) 340838 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red, and green; the red
  band is edged in white; a large warrior's shield covering crossed
  spears is superimposed at the center

@Kenya, Economy

Overview: 
  Kenya's 3.1% annual population growth rate - one of the highest in the
  world - has led to a decline in per capita output in each of the last
  three years, 1991-93. Undependable weather conditions and a shortage
  of arable land hamper long-term growth in agriculture, the leading
  economic sector. In industry and services, Nairobi's reluctance to
  embrace IMF-supported reforms has held back investment. Ethnic clashes
  and continued suspension of quick disbursing aid by the international
  donors kept growth at only 0.5% in 1993.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $33.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  55% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  23.8% urban (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $2.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $740 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  tea 25%, coffee 18%, petroleum products 11% (1990)
partners: 
  EC 47%, Africa 23%, Asia 11%, US 4%, Middle East 3% (1991)
Imports: 
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment 29%, petroleum and petroleum
  products 15%, iron and steel 7%, raw materials, food and consumer
  goods (1989)
partners: 
  EC 46%, Asia 23%, Middle East 20%, US 5% (1991)
External debt: 
  $7 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5.4% (1989 est.); accounts for 13% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  730,000 kW
production: 
  2.54 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  100 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  small-scale consumer goods (plastic, furniture, batteries, textiles,
  soap, cigarettes, flour), agricultural processing, oil refining,
  cement, tourism
Agriculture: 
  most important sector, accounting for 25% of GDP and 65% of exports;
  cash crops - coffee, tea, sisal, pineapple; food products - corn,
  wheat, sugarcane, fruit, vegetables, dairy products, beef, pork,
  poultry, eggs; food output not keeping pace with population growth,
  and crop production has been extended into marginal land
Illicit drugs: 
  widespread wild, small-plot cultivation of marijuana and gat; most
  locally consumed; transit country for Southwest Asian heroin moving to
  West Africa and onward to Europe and North America; Indian
  methaqualone also transits on way to South Africa
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $839 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $7.49
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $74 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $83 million 
Currency: 
  1 Kenyan shilling (KSh) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Kenyan shillings (KSh) per US$1 - 68.413 (December 1993), 32.217
  (1992), 27.508 (1991), 22.915 (1990), 20.572 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Kenya, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,040 km 1.000-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  64,590 km 
paved: 
  7,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 4,150 km; improved earth 53,440 km 
Inland waterways: 
  part of Lake Victoria system is within boundaries of Kenya
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 483 km 
Ports: 
  coastal - Mombasa, Lamu; inland - Kisumu
Merchant marine: 
  2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,883 GRT/6,255 DWT, barge
  carrier 1, oil tanker ship 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  248 
usable: 
  213 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  28 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  44 
Telecommunications: 
  in top group of African systems; consists primarily of radio relay
  links; over 260,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 16 AM; 4 FM, 6
  TV; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Indian
  Ocean INTELSAT

@Kenya, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary General Service Unit of the Police
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,144,891; fit for military service 3,799,202 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $294 million, 4.9% of GDP (FY88/89 est.)


@Kingman Reef

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Kingman Reef, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 1,600 km
  south-southwest of Honolulu, about halfway between Hawaii and American
  Samoa
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  1 sq km 
land area: 
  1 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  3 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, but moderated by prevailing winds
Terrain: 
  low and nearly level with a maximum elevation of about 1 meter
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  wet or awash most of the time, maximum elevation of about 1 meter
  makes this a maritime hazard
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  barren coral atoll with deep interior lagoon; closed to the public

@Kingman Reef, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Kingman Reef, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Kingman Reef 
Digraph: 
  KQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the US Navy,
  however it is awash the majority of the time, so it is not usable and
  uninhabited.
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC

@Kingman Reef, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Kingman Reef, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
  lagoon was used as a halfway station between Hawaii and American Samoa
  by Pan American Airways for flying boats in 1937 and 1938

@Kingman Reef, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Kiribati, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, straddling the equator in the Pacific Ocean,
  about halfway between Hawaii and Australia
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  717 sq km 
land area: 
  717 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than four times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes three island groups - Gilbert Islands, Line Islands, Phoenix
  Islands
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,143 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; marine, hot and humid, moderated by trade winds
Terrain: 
  mostly low-lying coral atolls surrounded by extensive reefs
Natural resources: 
  phosphate (production discontinued in 1979) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  51% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  46% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  typhoons can occur any time, but usually November to March; subject to
  occasional tornadoes
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not
  ratified - Climate Change
Note: 
  20 of the 33 islands are inhabited; Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati
  is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean
  - the others are Makatea in French Polynesia and Nauru

@Kiribati, People

Population: 
  77,853 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.99% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  31.64 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.31 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.56 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  98.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  54.16 years 
male: 
  52.56 years 
female: 
  55.78 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.77 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  I-Kiribati (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  I-Kiribati 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Micronesian 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 52.6%, Protestant (Congregational) 40.9%, Seventh-Day
  Adventist, Baha'i, Church of God, Mormon 6% (1985)
Languages: 
  English (official), Gilbertese 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  7,870 economically active, not including subsistence farmers (1985
  est.)

@Kiribati, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Kiribati 
conventional short form: 
  Kiribati 
former: 
  Gilbert Islands 
Digraph: 
  KR
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Tarawa 
Administrative divisions: 
  3 units; Gilbert Islands, Line Islands, Phoenix Islands
note: 
  a new administrative structure of 6 districts (Banaba, Central
  Gilberts, Line Islands, Northern Gilberts, Southern Gilberts, Tarawa)
  may have been changed to 21 island councils (one for each of the
  inhabited islands) named Abaiang, Abemama, Aranuka, Arorae, Banaba,
  Beru, Butaritari, Canton, Kiritimati, Kuria, Maiana, Makin, Marakei,
  Nikunau, Nonouti, Onotoa, Tabiteuea, Tabuaeran, Tamana, Tarawa,
  Teraina
Independence: 
  12 July 1979 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 12 July (1979) 
Constitution: 
  12 July 1979
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President (Beretitenti) Teatao TEANNAKI (since 8 July 1991); Vice
  President (Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti) Taomati IUTA (since 8 July 1991);
  election last held on 8 July 1991 (next to be held by NA 1996);
  results - Teatao TEANNAKI 52%, Roniti TEIWAKI 28%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from an elected parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Assembly (Maneaba Ni Maungatabu): 
  elections last held on 8 May 1991 (next to be held by NA 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (40 total; 39 elected)
  percent of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Progressive Party, Teatao TEANNAKI; Christian Democratic
  Party, Teburoro TITO; New Movement Party, leader NA; Liberal Party,
  Tewareka TENTOA; Maneaba Party, Roniti TEIWAKI
note: 
  there is no tradition of formally organized political parties in
  Kiribati; they more closely resemble factions or interest groups
  because they have no party headquarters, formal platforms, or party
  structures
Member of: 
  ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFC, IMF, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, ITU, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU,
  WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Kiribati has no mission in the US
US diplomatic representation: 
  the ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Kiribati
Flag: 
  the upper half is red with a yellow frigate bird flying over a yellow
  rising sun, and the lower half is blue with three horizontal wavy
  white stripes to represent the ocean

@Kiribati, Economy

Overview: 
  The country has few national resources. Commercially viable phosphate
  deposits were exhausted at the time of independence in 1979. Copra and
  fish now represent the bulk of production and exports. The economy has
  fluctuated widely in recent years. Real GDP declined about 8% in 1987,
  as the fish catch fell sharply to only one-fourth the level of 1986
  and copra production was hampered by repeated rains. Output rebounded
  strongly in 1988, with real GDP growing by 17%. The upturn in economic
  growth came from an increase in copra production and a good fish
  catch. Following the strong surge in output in 1988, GNP increased 1%
  in both 1989 and 1990.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $36.8 million (1990 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.5% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $525 (1990 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  2%; underemployment 70% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $29.9 million 
expenditures: 
  $16.3 million, including capital expenditures of $14 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $4.2 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  copra 50%, seaweed 16%, fish 15%
partners: 
  Denmark, Fiji, US
Imports: 
  $33.1 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, miscellaneous manufactured goods,
  fuel
partners: 
  Australia 40%, Japan 18%, Fiji 17%, NZ 6%, US 4% (1991)
External debt: 
  $2 million (December 1989 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0.7% (1992 est.); accounts for less than 4% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,000 kW
production: 
  13 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  190 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  fishing, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 23% of GDP (including fishing); copra and fish contribute
  about 65% to exports; subsistence farming predominates; food crops -
  taro, breadfruit, sweet potatoes, vegetables; not self-sufficient in
  food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $273 million 
Currency: 
  1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364 (January 1994), 1.4704
  (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2835 (1991), 1.2799 (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  NA

@Kiribati, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  640 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Inland waterways: 
  small network of canals, totaling 5 km, in Line Islands
Ports: 
  Banaba and Betio (Tarawa)
Merchant marine: 
  1 passenger-cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,291 GRT/1,295
  DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  21 
usable: 
  20 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
Telecommunications: 
  1,400 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV; 1 Pacific
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Kiribati, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Police Force (carries out law enforcement functions and paramilitary
  duties; there are small police posts on all islands); no military
  force is maintained
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Korea, North, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, between China and South Korea
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  120,540 sq km 
land area: 
  120,410 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Mississippi
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,673 km, China 1,416 km, South Korea 238 km, Russia 19 km 
Coastline: 
  2,495 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
military boundary line: 
  50 nm in the Sea of Japan and the exclusive economic zone limit in the
  Yellow Sea where all foreign vessels and aircraft without permission
  are banned
International disputes: 
  short section of boundary with China is indefinite; Demarcation Line
  with South Korea
Climate: 
  temperate with rainfall concentrated in summer
Terrain: 
  mostly hills and mountains separated by deep, narrow valleys; coastal
  plains wide in west, discontinuous in east
Natural resources: 
  coal, lead, tungsten, zinc, graphite, magnesite, iron ore, copper,
  gold, pyrites, salt, fluorspar, hydropower 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  18% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  74% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  14,000 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  localized air pollution attributable to inadequate industrial controls
natural hazards: 
  late spring droughts often followed by severe flooding; subject to
  occasional typhoons which occur during the early fall
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Environmental Modification, Ship
  Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location bordering China, South Korea, and Russia;
  mountainous interior is isolated, nearly inaccessible, and sparsely
  populated

@Korea, North, People

Population: 
  23,066,573 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.83% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  23.75 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.5 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.78 years 
male: 
  66.69 years 
female: 
  73.02 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.37 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Korean(s) 
adjective: 
  Korean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  racially homogeneous
Religions: 
  Buddhism and Confucianism, some Christianity and syncretic Chondogyo 
note: 
  autonomous religious activities now almost nonexistent;
  government-sponsored religious groups exist to provide illusion of
  religious freedom
Languages: 
  Korean 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  9.615 million 
by occupation: 
  agricultural 36%, nonagricultural 64%
note: 
  shortage of skilled and unskilled labor (mid-1987 est.)

@Korea, North, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
conventional short form: 
  North Korea 
local long form: 
  Choson-minjujuui-inmin-konghwaguk 
local short form: 
  none 
Abbreviation: 
  DPRK 
Digraph: 
  KN
Type: 
  Communist state; Stalinist dictatorship
Capital: 
  P'yongyang 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces (do, singular and plural) and 3 special cities* (jikhalsi,
  singular and plural); Chagang-do (Chagang Province), Hamgyong-bukto
  (North Hamgyong Province), Hamgyong-namdo (South Hamgyong Province),
  Hwanghae-bukto (North Hwanghae Province), Hwanghae-namdo (South
  Hwanghae Province), Kaesong-si* (Kaesong City), Kangwon-do (Kangwon
  Province), Namp'o-si* (Namp'o City), P'yongan-bukto (North P'yongan
  Province), P'yongan-namdo (South P'yongan Province), P'yongyang-si*
  (P'yongyang City), Yanggang-do (Yanggang Province)
Independence: 
  9 September 1948 
note: 
  15 August 1945, date of independence from the Japanese and celebrated
  in North Korea as National Liberation Day
National holiday: 
  DPRK Foundation Day, 9 September (1948) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 1948, completely revised 27 December 1972, revised again in
  April 1992
Legal system: 
  based on German civil law system with Japanese influences and
  Communist legal theory; no judicial review of legislative acts; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  17 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President KIM Il-song (national leader since 1948, president since 28
  December 1972); designated successor KIM Chong-il (son of president,
  born 16 February 1942); election last held 24 May 1990 (next to be
  held by NA 1995); results - President KIM Il-song was reelected
  without opposition
head of government: 
  Premier KANG Song-san (since December 1992) 
cabinet: 
  State Administration Council; appointed by the Supreme People's
  Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme People's Assembly (Ch'oego Inmin Hoeui): 
  elections last held on 7-9 April 1993 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (687 total) the KWP approves a
  single list of candidates who are elected without opposition; minor
  parties hold a few seats
Judicial branch: 
  Central Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  major party - Korean Workers' Party (KWP), KIM Il-song, general
  secretary, and his son, KIM Chong-il, secretary, Central Committee;
  Korean Social Democratic Party, KIM Pyong-sik, chairman; Chondoist
  Chongu Party, YU Mi-yong, chairwoman
Member of: 
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, ICAO, IFAD, IMF (observer), IMO, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none
US diplomatic representation: 
  none
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple width), and blue;
  the red band is edged in white; on the hoist side of the red band is a
  white disk with a red five-pointed star

@Korea, North, Economy

Overview: 
  More than 90% of this command economy is socialized; agricultural land
  is collectivized; and state-owned industry produces 95% of
  manufactured goods. State control of economic affairs is unusually
  tight even for a Communist country because of the small size and
  homogeneity of the society and the strict rule of KIM Il-song and his
  son, KIM Chong-il. Economic growth during the period 1984-88 averaged
  2%-3%, but output declined by 3%-5% annually during 1989-92 because of
  systemic problems and disruptions in socialist-style economic
  relations with the former USSR and China. In 1992, output dropped
  sharply, by perhaps 7%-9%, as the economy felt the cumulative effect
  of the reduction in outside support. The leadership insisted on
  maintaining its high level of military outlays from a shrinking
  economic pie. Moreover, a serious drawdown in inventories and critical
  shortages in the energy sector have led to increasing interruptions in
  industrial production. Abundant mineral resources and hydropower have
  formed the basis of industrial development since WWII. Output of the
  extractive industries includes coal, iron ore, magnesite, graphite,
  copper, zinc, lead, and precious metals. Manufacturing is centered on
  heavy industry, including military industry, with light industry
  lagging far behind. Despite the use of improved seed varieties,
  expansion of irrigation, and the heavy use of fertilizers, North Korea
  has not yet become self-sufficient in food production. Six consecutive
  years of poor harvests, coupled with distribution problems, have led
  to chronic food shortages. North Korea remains far behind South Korea
  in economic development and living standards.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $22 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -7 to -9% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $19.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $19.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  minerals, metallurgical products, agricultural and fishery products,
  manufactures (including armaments)
partners: 
  China, Japan, Russia, South Korea, Germany, Hong Kong, Mexico
Imports: 
  $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum, grain, coking coal, machinery and equipment, consumer goods
partners: 
  China, Russia, Japan, Hong Kong, Germany, Singapore
External debt: 
  $8 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -7% to -9% (1992 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  7,300,000 kW
production: 
  26 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,160 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  machine building, military products, electric power, chemicals,
  mining, metallurgy, textiles, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 25% of GNP and 36% of work force; principal crops -
  rice, corn, potatoes, soybeans, pulses; livestock and livestock
  products - cattle, hogs, pork, eggs; not self-sufficient in grain
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Communist countries, $1.4 billion a year in the 1980s, but very little
  now
Currency: 
  1 North Korean won (Wn) = 100 chon
Exchange rates: 
  North Korean won (Wn) per US$1 - 2.15 (May 1994), 2.13 (May 1992),
  2.14 (September 1991), 2.1 (January 1990), 2.3 (December 1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Korea, North, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,915 km total; 4,250 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, 665 km
  0.762-meter narrow gauge; 159 km double track; 3,084 km electrified;
  government owned (1989)
Highways: 
total: 
  30,000 km 
paved: 
  1,440 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 28,560 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  2,253 km; mostly navigable by small craft only
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 37 km 
Ports: 
  primary - Ch'ongjin, Hungnam (Hamhung), Najin, Namp'o, Wonsan;
  secondary - Haeju, Kimch'aek, Kosong, Sinuiju, Songnim, Sonbong
  (formerly Unggi), Ungsang
Merchant marine: 
  83 ships (1,000 GRT and over) totaling 706,497 GRT/1,114,827 DWT, bulk
  9, cargo 67, combination bulk 1, oil tanker 2, passenger 1,
  passenger-cargo 2, short-sea passenger 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  55 
usable: 
  55 (est.)
with permanent-surface runways: 
  about 30 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  fewer than 5 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  20 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  30 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 18 AM, no FM, 11 TV; 300,000 TV sets (1989);
  3,500,000 radio receivers; 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Korea, North, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Korean People's Army (including the Army, Navy, Air Force), Civil
  Security Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,658,529; fit for military service 4,044,355; reach
  military age (18) annually 196,763 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - about $5 billion, 20%-25% of GNP (1991
  est.); note - the officially announced but suspect figure is $2.2
  billion (1994), about 12% of total spending


@Korea, South, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, between North Korea and Japan
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  98,480 sq km 
land area: 
  98,190 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Indiana
Land boundaries: 
  total 238 km, North Korea 238 km 
Coastline: 
  2,413 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm; 3 nm in the Korea Strait
International disputes: 
  Demarcation Line with North Korea; Liancourt Rocks claimed by Japan
Climate: 
  temperate, with rainfall heavier in summer than winter
Terrain: 
  mostly hills and mountains; wide coastal plains in west and south
Natural resources: 
  coal, tungsten, graphite, molybdenum, lead, hydropower 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  21% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  67% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  13,530 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution in large cities; water pollution from the discharge of
  sewage and industrial effluents
natural hazards: 
  occasional typhoons bring high winds and floods; earthquakes in
  southwest
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Climate Change, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Whaling; signed, but not
  ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Law of the
  Sea

@Korea, South, People

Population: 
  45,082,880 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.04% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.7 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.17 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.91 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  21.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.59 years 
male: 
  67.39 years 
female: 
  73.98 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.65 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Korean(s) 
adjective: 
  Korean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  homogeneous (except for about 20,000 Chinese) 
Religions: 
  Christianity 48.6%, Buddhism 47.4%, Confucianism 3%, pervasive folk
  religion (shamanism), Chondogyo (Religion of the Heavenly Way) 0.2% 
Languages: 
  Korean, English widely taught in high school
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  96% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  20 million 
by occupation: 
  services and other 52%, mining and manufacturing 27%, agriculture,
  fishing, forestry 21% (1991)

@Korea, South, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Korea 
conventional short form: 
  South Korea 
local long form: 
  Taehan-min'guk 
local short form: 
  none 
Abbreviation: 
  ROK 
Digraph: 
  KS
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Seoul 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces (do, singular and plural) and 6 special cities* (jikhalsi,
  singular and plural); Cheju-do, Cholla-bukto, Cholla-namdo,
  Ch'ungch'ong-bukto, Ch'ungch'ong-namdo, Inch'on-jikhalsi*, Kangwon-do,
  Kwangju-jikhalsi*, Kyonggi-do, Kyongsang-bukto, Kyongsang-namdo,
  Pusan-jikhalsi*, Soul-t'ukpyolsi*, Taegu-jikhalsi*, Taejon-jikhalsi*
Independence: 
  15 August 1948 
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 15 August (1948) 
Constitution: 
  25 February 1988
Legal system: 
  combines elements of continental European civil law systems,
  Anglo-American law, and Chinese classical thought
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President KIM Yong-sam (since 25 February 1993); election last held on
  18 December 1992 (next to be held NA December 1997); results - KIM
  Yong-sam (DLP) 41.9%, KIM Tae-chung (DP) 33.8%, CHONG Chu-yong (UPP)
  16.3%, other 8%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister YI Yong-tok (since 29 April 1994); Deputy Prime
  Minister CHONG Chae-sok (since 21 December 1993) and Deputy Prime
  Minister YI Hong-ku (since 30 April 1994) 
cabinet: 
  State Council; appointed by the president on the prime minister's
  recommendation
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Kukhoe): 
  elections last held on 24 March 1992; results - DLP 38.5%, DP 29.2%,
  Unification National Party (UNP) 17.3% (name later changed to UPP),
  other 15%; seats - (299 total) DLP 149, DP 97, UNP 31, other 22; the
  distribution of seats as of January 1994 was DLP 172, DP 96, UPP 11,
  other 20
note: 
  the change in the distribution of seats reflects the fluidity of the
  current situation where party members are constantly switching from
  one party to another
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
majority party: 
  Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), KIM Yong-sam, president
opposition: 
  Democratic Party (DP), YI Ki-taek, executive chairman; United People's
  Party (UPP), KIM Tong-kil, chairman; several smaller parties
note: 
  the DLP resulted from a merger of the Democratic Justice Party (DJP),
  Reunification Democratic Party (RDP), and New Democratic Republican
  Party (NDRP) on 9 February 1990
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Korean National Council of Churches; National Democratic Alliance of
  Korea; National Federation of Student Associations; National
  Federation of Farmers' Associations; National Council of Labor Unions;
  Federation of Korean Trade Unions; Korean Veterans' Association;
  Federation of Korean Industries; Korean Traders Association
Member of: 
  AfDB, APEC, AsDB, CCC, COCOM (cooperating), CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO,
  G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, OAS
  (observer), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador HAN Sung-su 
chancery: 
  2450 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-5600 
consulate(s) general: 
  Agana (Guam), Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Honolulu, Houston,
  Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Francisco, and Seattle 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador James T. LANEY 
embassy: 
  82 Sejong-Ro, Chongro-ku, Seoul 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy, Unit 15550, Seoul; APO AP 96205-0001 
telephone: 
  [82] (2) 397-4000 through 4008 and 397-4114 
FAX: 
  [82] (2) 738-8845 
consulate(s): 
  Pusan 
Flag: 
  white with a red (top) and blue yin-yang symbol in the center; there
  is a different black trigram from the ancient I Ching (Book of
  Changes) in each corner of the white field

@Korea, South, Economy

Overview: 
  The driving force behind the economy's dynamic growth has been the
  planned development of an export-oriented economy in a vigorously
  entrepreneurial society. Real GNP increased more than 10% annually
  between 1986 and 1991. This growth ultimately led to an overheated
  situation characterized by a tight labor market, strong inflationary
  pressures, and a rapidly rising current account deficit. As a result,
  in 1992, economic policy focused on slowing the growth rate of
  inflation and reducing the deficit. Annual growth slowed to 5%, still
  above the rate in most other countries of the world. Growth increased
  to 6.3% in 1993 as a result of fourth quarter manufacturing production
  growth of over 10% and is expected to be in the 8% range for 1994.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $424 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.3% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $9,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.8% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.6% (October 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $48.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $48.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $81 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  electronic and electrical equipment, machinery, steel, automobiles,
  ships, textiles, clothing, footwear, fish
partners: 
  US 26%, Japan 17%, EC 14%
Imports: 
  $78.9 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery, electronics and electronic equipment, oil, steel, transport
  equipment, textiles, organic chemicals, grains
partners: 
  Japan 26%, US 24%, EC 15%
External debt: 
  $42 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5% (1992 est.); accounts for about 45% of GNP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  27,016 kW (1993)
production: 
  105 billion kWh (1992)
consumption per capita: 
  2,380 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  electronics, automobile production, chemicals, shipbuilding, steel,
  textiles, clothing, footwear, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 8% of GNP and employs 21% of work force (including
  fishing and forestry); principal crops - rice, root crops, barley,
  vegetables, fruit; livestock and livestock products - cattle, hogs,
  chickens, milk, eggs; self-sufficient in food, except for wheat; fish
  catch of 2.9 million metric tons, seventh-largest in world
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $3.9 billion; non-US
  countries (1970-89), $3 billion 
Currency: 
  1 South Korean won (W) = 100 chun (theoretical)
Exchange rates: 
  South Korean won (W) per US$1 - 810.48 (January 1994), 802.68 (1993),
  780.65 (1992), 733.35 (1991), 707.76 (1990), 671.46 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Korea, South, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,091 km total (1991); 3,044 km 1.435 meter standard gauge, 47 km
  0.610-meter narrow gauge, 847 km double track; 525 km electrified,
  government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  63,201 km 
paved: 
  expressways 1,551 km 
unpaved: 
  NA 
undifferentiated: 
  national highway 12,190 km; provincial, local roads 49,460 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  1,609 km; use restricted to small native craft
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 455 km 
Ports: 
  Pusan, Inch'on, Kunsan, Mokp'o, Ulsan
Merchant marine: 
  417 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,425,920 GRT/10,535,850 DWT,
  bulk 123, cargo 132, chemical tanker 16, combination bulk 2,
  combination ore/oil 2, container 60, liquefied gas 13, multifunction
  large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 47, refrigerated cargo 11, short-sea
  passenger 1, vehicle carrier 9 
Airports: 
total: 
  104 
usable: 
  95 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  61 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  23 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  18 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent domestic and international services; 13,276,449 telephone
  subscribers; broadcast stations - 79 AM, 46 FM, 256 TV (57 of 1 kW or
  greater); satellite earth stations - 2 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT and 1
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT

@Korea, South, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 13,435,598; fit for military service 8,623,325; reach
  military age (18) annually 417,055 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $13.0 billion, 3.6% of GNP (1994 est.)


@Kuwait, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, at the head of the Persian Gulf, between Iraq and Saudi
  Arabia
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  17,820 sq km 
land area: 
  17,820 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  total 464 km, Iraq 242 km, Saudi Arabia 222 km 
Coastline: 
  499 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  in April 1991 Iraq officially accepted UN Security Council Resolution
  687, which demands that Iraq accept the inviolability of the boundary
  set forth in its 1963 agreement with Kuwait, ending earlier claims to
  Bubiyan and Warbah islands, or to all of Kuwait; the 20 May 1993 final
  report of the UN Iraq/Kuwait Boundary Demarcation Commission was
  welcomed by the Security Council in Resolution 833 of 27 May 1993,
  which also reaffirmed that the decisions of the commission on the
  boundary were final, bringing to a completion the official demarcation
  of the Iraq-Kuwait boundary; Iraqi officials still refuse to
  unconditionally recognize Kuwaiti sovereignty of the inviolability of
  the UN demarcated border; ownership of Qaruh and Umm al Maradim
  islands disputed by Saudi Arabia
Climate: 
  dry desert; intensely hot summers; short, cool winters
Terrain: 
  flat to slightly undulating desert plain
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, fish, shrimp, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  8% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  92% 
Irrigated land: 
  20 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  some of world's largest and most sophisticated desalination facilities
  provide much of the water; air and water pollution; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping
Note: 
  strategic location at head of Persian Gulf

@Kuwait, People

Population: 
  1,819,322 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  5.24% (1994 est.) 
note: 
  this rate reflects the continued post-Gulf crisis return of nationals
  and expatriates
Birth rate: 
  29.43 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  2.37 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  25.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.99 years 
male: 
  72.83 years 
female: 
  77.25 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Kuwaiti(s) 
adjective: 
  Kuwaiti 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Kuwaiti 45%, other Arab 35%, South Asian 9%, Iranian 4%, other 7% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 85% (Shi'a 30%, Sunni 45%, other 10%), Christian, Hindu, Parsi,
  and other 15% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), English widely spoken
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  73% 
male: 
  77% 
female: 
  67% 
Labor force: 
  566,000 (1986)
by occupation: 
  services 45.0%, construction 20.0%, trade 12.0%, manufacturing 8.6%,
  finance and real estate 2.6%, agriculture 1.9%, power and water 1.7%,
  mining and quarrying 1.4%
note: 
  70% of labor force non-Kuwaiti (1986)

@Kuwait, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  State of Kuwait 
conventional short form: 
  Kuwait 
local long form: 
  Dawlat al Kuwayt 
local short form: 
  Al Kuwayt 
Digraph: 
  KU
Type: 
  nominal constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Kuwait 
Administrative divisions: 
  5 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al 'Ahmadi, Al
  Jahrah, Al Kuwayt, Hawalli, Al Farwaniyah
Independence: 
  19 June 1961 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 25 February (1948) 
Constitution: 
  16 November 1962 (some provisions suspended since 29 August 1962)
Legal system: 
  civil law system with Islamic law significant in personal matters; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  adult males who resided in Kuwait before 1920 and their male
  descendants at age 21
note: 
  only 10% of all citizens are eligible to vote
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Amir Shaykh JABIR al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah (since 31 December 1977) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister and Crown Prince SAAD al-Abdallah al-Salim Al Sabah
  (since 8 February 1978); Deputy Prime Minister SABAH al-Ahmad al-Jabir
  Al Sabah (since 17 October 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the Prime Minister and approved by
  the Amir
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Majlis al-umma): 
  dissolved 3 July 1986; new elections were held on 5 October 1992 with
  a second election in the 14th and 16th constituencies held February
  1993
Judicial branch: 
  High Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Other political or pressure groups: 
  small, clandestine leftist and Shi'a fundamentalist groups are active;
  several groups critical of government policies are publicly active
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, BDEAC, CAEU, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GATT, GCC,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC,
  OIC, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador MUHAMMAD al-Sabah al-Salim al-Sabah 
chancery: 
  2940 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 966-0702 
FAX: 
  (202) 966-0517 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Ryan CROCKER 
embassy: 
  Bneid al-Gar (opposite the Kuwait International Hotel), Kuwait City 
mailing address: 
  P.O. Box 77 SAFAT, 13001 SAFAT, Kuwait; Unit 69000, Kuwait; APO AE
  09880-9000 
telephone: 
  [965] 242-4151 through 4159 
FAX: 
  [956] 244-2855 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and red with a
  black trapezoid based on the hoist side

@Kuwait, Economy

Overview: 
  Kuwait is a small and relatively open economy with proven crude oil
  reserves of about 94 billion barrels - 10% of world reserves. Kuwait
  has rebuilt its war-ravaged petroleum sector; its crude oil production
  reached at least 2.0 million barrels per day by the end of 1993. The
  government ran a sizable fiscal deficit in 1993. Petroleum accounts
  for nearly half of GDP and 90% of export and government revenues.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $25.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  15% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $15,100 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  NEGL% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $13 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY93)
Exports: 
  $10.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  oil
partners: 
  France 16%, Italy 15%, Japan 12%, UK 11%
Imports: 
  $6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  food, construction materials, vehicles and parts, clothing
partners: 
  US 35%, Japan 12%, UK 9%, Canada 9%
External debt: 
  $7.2 billion (December 1989 est.)
note: 
  external debt has grown substantially in 1991 and 1992 to pay for
  restoration of war damage
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for NA% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,873,000 kW available out of 7,398,000 kW due to Persian Gulf war
production: 
  12.264 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,890 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, petrochemicals, desalination, food processing, building
  materials, salt, construction
Agriculture: 
  practically none; dependent on imports for food; about 75% of potable
  water must be distilled or imported
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  pledged bilateral aid to less developed countries (1979-89), $18.3
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 Kuwaiti dinar (KD) = 1,000 fils
Exchange rates: 
  Kuwaiti dinars (KD) per US$1 - 0.2982 (January 1994), 0.3017 (1993),
  0.2934 (1992), 0.2843 (1991), 0.2915 (1990), 0.2937 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Kuwait, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  3,900 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 3,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, sand, earth 900 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 877 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural gas 165 km 
Ports: 
  Ash Shu'aybah, Ash Shuwaykh, Mina' al Ahmadi, Mina' 'Abd Allah, Mina'
  Su'ud
Merchant marine: 
  46 ships (1,000 GRT or over), totaling 2,153,693 GRT/3,561,568 DWT,
  cargo 10, container 2, liquefied gas 7, livestock carrier 4, oil
  tanker 23 
Airports: 
total: 
  7 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  civil network suffered extensive damage as a result of the Gulf war
  and reconstruction is still under way with some restored international
  and domestic capabilities; broadcast stations - 3 AM, 0 FM, 3 TV;
  satellite earth stations - destroyed during Gulf war and not rebuilt
  yet; temporary mobile satellite ground stations provide international
  telecommunications; coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Saudi
  Arabia; service to Iraq is nonoperational

@Kuwait, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police Force, National Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 537,696; fit for military service 321,767; reach
  military age (18) annually 15,354 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.5 billion, 7.3% of GDP (FY92/93)


@Kyrgyzstan, Geography

Location: 
  Central Asia, between China and Kazakhstan
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian States,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  198,500 sq km 
land area: 
  191,300 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than South Dakota
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,878 km, China 858 km, Kazakhstan 1,051 km, Tajikistan 870 km,
  Uzbekistan 1,099 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  territorial dispute with Tajikistan on southwestern boundary in Isfara
  Valley area
Climate: 
  dry continental to polar in high Tien Shan; subtropical in southwest
  (Fergana Valley); temperate in northern foothill zone
Terrain: 
  peaks of Tien Shan rise to 7,000 meters, and associated valleys and
  basins encompass entire nation
Natural resources: 
  small amounts of coal abundant hydroelectric potential; significant
  deposits of gold and rare earth metals; locally exploitable coal, oil
  and natural gas; other deposits of nepheline, mercury, bismuth, lead,
  and zinc, natural gas, oil, nepheline, rare earth metals, mercury,
  bismuth, gold, lead, zinc, hydroelectric power 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  NEGL%
meadows and pastures: 
  42% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  51% 
Irrigated land: 
  10,320 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution; many people get their water directly from
  contaminated streams and wells and as a result, water-borne diseases
  are prevalent; increasing soil salinity from faulty irrigation
  practices
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  landlocked

@Kyrgyzstan, People

Population: 
  4,698,108 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.53% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  26.33 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.36 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.64 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  46.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.92 years 
male: 
  63.69 years 
female: 
  72.35 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.35 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Kyrgyz(s) 
adjective: 
  Kyrgyz 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Kirghiz 52.4%, Russian 21.5%, Uzbek 12.9%, Ukrainian 2.5%, German
  2.4%, other 8.3% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 70%, Russian Orthodox NA%
Languages: 
  Kirghiz (Kyrgyz) - official language, Russian widely used
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  1.836 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and forestry 38%, industry and construction 21%, other 41%
  (1990)

@Kyrgyzstan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kyrgyz Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Kyrgyzstan 
local long form: 
  Kyrgyz Respublikasy 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  KG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Bishkek 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 oblasttar (singular - oblast); Chuy Oblasty, Jalal-Abad Oblasty,
  Naryn Oblasty, Osh Oblasty, Talas Oblasty, Ysyk-Kol Oblasty
note: 
  the administrative center for Chuy Oblasty is Bishkek; the
  administrative center for Ysyk-Kol Oblasty may be Ksyk-Kol or Karakol;
  all other oblasttar have administrative centers of the same name as
  the oblast
Independence: 
  31 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 2 December; Independence Day, 31 August (1991) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 5 May 1993
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Askar AKAYEV (since 28 October 1990); election last held 12
  October 1991 (next to be held NA 1996); results - Askar AKAYEV won in
  uncontested election with 95% of vote and with 90% of electorate
  voting; note - president elected by Supreme Soviet 28 October 1990,
  then by popular vote 12 October 1991; note - AKAYEV won 96% of the
  vote in a referendum on his status as president on 30 January 1993
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Apas DZHUMAGULOV (since NA December 1993); First Deputy
  Prime Minister Almambet MATURBRAIMOV (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet of Ministers; subordinate to the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Zhogorku Keneshom: 
  elections last held 25 February 1990 for the Supreme Soviet (next to
  be held no later than NA November 1994 for the Zhogorku Keneshom);
  results - Communists 90%; seats - (350 total) Communists 310
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Social Democrats, Ishenbai KADYRBEKOV, chairman; Kyrgyzstan Democratic
  Movement (KDM), Kazat AKHMATOV, chairman; National Unity, German
  KUZNETSOV; Communist Party, Dzhumalbek AMANBAYEV, chairman; Erkin
  (Free) Kyrgyzstan Party, Topchubek TURGUNALIYEV, chairman
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Unity Democratic Movement; Peasant Party; Council of Free
  Trade Unions; Union of Entrepreneurs; Agrarian Party
Member of: 
  CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IOC, NACC, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
chancery: 
  (temporary) Suite 705, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 347-3732/3 
FAX: 
  (202) 347-3718 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward HURWITZ 
embassy: 
  Erkindik Prospekt #66, Bishkek 720002 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  7-3312 22-29-20, 22-26-93, 22-29-89 
FAX: 
  7-3312 22-35-51 
Flag: 
  red field with a yellow sun in the center having 40 rays representing
  the 40 Krygyz tribes; on the obverse side the rays run
  counterclockwise, on the reverse, clockwise; in the center of the sun
  is a red ring crossed by two sets of three lines, a stylized
  representation of the roof of the traditional Kyrgyz yurt

@Kyrgyzstan, Economy

Overview: 
  Kyrgyzstan is one of the smallest and poorest states of the former
  Soviet Union. Its economy is heavily agricultural, producing cotton
  and tobacco on irrigated land in the south, grain in the foothills of
  the north, and sheep and goats on mountain pastures. Its small and
  obsolescent industrial sector, concentrated around Bishkek, is heavily
  dependent on Russia and other CIS countries for customers and for
  inputs, including most of its fuel. Since 1990, the economy has
  contracted by almost 40%. Kyrgyzstan's inflation was high in 1993,
  about 23% per month, but rates were declining at the end of the year.
  Kyrgyzstan introduced its national currency, the som, in May 1993, it
  has privatized 28% of its former state assets, and plans call for a
  massive voucher privatization in 1994. Although Kyrgyzstan will
  receive relatively large flows of foreign aid, ongoing economic
  restructuring will continue to be painful with an anticipated increase
  in unemployment as uneconomic enterprises close. President AKAYEV will
  be under strong political pressure to backtrack on some reform
  measures.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $11.3 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Kirghiz statistics, which are very
  uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -13.4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,440 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  23% per month (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  0.2% includes officially registered unemployed; also large numbers of
  unregistered unemployed and underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $100.4 million to countries outside the FSU (1993 est.)
commodities: 
  wool, chemicals, cotton, ferrous and nonferrous metals, shoes,
  machinery, tobacco
partners: 
  Russia 70%, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and others
Imports: 
  $105.8 million from countries outside the FSU (1993 est.)
commodities: 
  grain, lumber, industrial products, ferrous metals, fuel, machinery,
  textiles, footwear
partners: 
  other CIS republics
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -27% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  4,100,000 kW
production: 
  11.8 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,551 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  small machinery, textiles, food-processing industries, cement, shoes,
  sawn logs, refrigerators, furniture, electric motors, gold, and rare
  earth metals
Agriculture: 
  wool, tobacco, cotton, livestock (sheep, goats, cattle), vegetables,
  meat, grapes, fruits and berries, eggs, milk, potatoes
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for CIS
  consumption; limited government eradication program; used as
  transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western Europe and North
  America from Central and Southwest Asia
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $80 million in 1993 and an anticipated $400 million in 1994
Currency: 
  introduced national currency, the som (10 May 1993)
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Kyrgyzstan, Communications

Railroads: 
  370 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  30,300 km 
paved and graveled: 
  22,600 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 7,700 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 200 km 
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  52 
usable: 
  27 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  13 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  poorly developed; 342,000 telephones in 1991 (also about 100,000
  unsatisfied applications for household telephones); 76 telephones per
  1,000 persons (31 December 1991); microwave radio relay is principal
  means of intercity telephone links; connections with other CIS
  countries by landline or microwave and with other countries by leased
  connections with Moscow international gateway switch and by satellite;
  2 satellite earth stations - 1 GORIZONT and 1 INTELSAT (links through
  Ankara to 200 other countries and receives Turkish broadcasts);
  broadcast receivers - radios 825,000, TVs 875,000, radio receiver
  systems with multiple speakers for program diffusion 748,000

@Kyrgyzstan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Guard, Security Forces (internal and border troops), Civil
  Defense 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,123,959; fit for military service 912,516; reach
  military age (18) annually 44,528 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Laos, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, between Vietnam and Thailand
Map references: 
  Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  236,800 sq km 
land area: 
  230,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Utah
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,083 km, Burma 235 km, Cambodia 541 km, China 423 km, Thailand
  1,754 km, Vietnam 2,130 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  boundary dispute with Thailand
Climate: 
  tropical monsoon; rainy season (May to November); dry season (December
  to April)
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged mountains; some plains and plateaus
Natural resources: 
  timber, hydropower, gypsum, tin, gold, gemstones 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  58% 
other: 
  35% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,200 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  subject to floods, drought, and blight
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but
  not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked

@Laos, People

Population: 
  4,701,654 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.85% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.23 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  14.74 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  101.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  51.68 years 
male: 
  50.16 years 
female: 
  53.28 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.07 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Lao(s) or Laotian(s) 
adjective: 
  Lao or Laotian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Lao 50%, Phoutheung (Kha) 15%, tribal Thai 20%, Meo, Hmong, Yao, and
  other 15% 
Religions: 
  Buddhist 85%, animist and other 15% 
Languages: 
  Lao (official), French, English 
Literacy: 
  age 15-45 can read and write (1993)
total population: 
  64% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1-1.5 million
by occupation: 
  agriculture 85-90% (est.)

@Laos, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Lao People's Democratic Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Laos 
local long form: 
  Sathalanalat Paxathipatai Paxaxon Lao 
local short form: 
  none 
Digraph: 
  LA
Type: 
  Communist state 
Capital: 
  Vientiane 
Administrative divisions: 
  16 provinces (khoueng, singular and plural) and 1 municipality*
  (kampheng nakhon, singular and plural); Attapu, Bokeo, Bolikhamsai,
  Champasak, Houaphan, Khammouan, Louang Namtha, Louangphrabang,
  Oudomxai, Phongsali, Saravan, Savannakhet, Xekong, Vientiane,
  Viangchan*, Xaignabouri, Xiangkhoang
Independence: 
  19 July 1949 (from France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 2 December (1975) (proclamation of the Lao People's
  Democratic Republic)
Constitution: 
  promulgated 14 August 1991
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President NOUHAK PHOUMSAVAN (since 25 November 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Gen. KHAMTAI SIPHANDON (since 15 August 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers;  appointed by the president, approved by the
  Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Third National Assembly: 
  elections last held on 20 December 1992 (next to be held NA); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (85 total) number of seats by
  party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme People's Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP), KHAMTAI Siphandon, party
  president; includes Lao Front for National Construction (LFNC); other
  parties moribund
Other political or pressure groups: 
  non-Communist political groups moribund; most leaders fled the country
  in 1975
Member of: 
  ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN (observer), CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador HIEM PHOMMACHANH 
chancery: 
  2222 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-6416 or 6417 
FAX: 
  (202) 332-4923 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Victor TOMSETH 
embassy: 
  Rue Bartholonie, Vientiane 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 114, Vientiane, or American Embassy, Box V, APO AP 96546 
telephone: 
  [851] 2220, 2357, or 3570, 16-9581 
FAX: 
  [851] 4675 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of red (top), blue (double width), and red with
  a large white disk centered in the blue band

@Laos, Economy

Overview: 
  Laos has had a Communist centrally planned economy with government
  ownership and control of major productive enterprises. Since 1986,
  however, the government has been decentralizing control and
  encouraging private enterprise. Laos is a landlocked country with a
  primitive infrastructure; it has no railroads, a rudimentary road
  system, limited external and internal telecommunications, and
  electricity available in only a limited area. Subsistence agriculture
  is the main occupation, accounting for over 60% of GDP and providing
  about 85-90% of total employment. The predominant crop is rice. For
  the foreseeable future the economy will continue to depend for its
  survival on foreign aid from the IMF and other international sources;
  aid from the former USSR and Eastern Europe has been cut sharply.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $4.1 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.8% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  21% (1989 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $83 million 
expenditures: 
  $188.5 million, including capital expenditures of $94 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $133 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  electricity, wood products, coffee, tin
partners: 
  Thailand, Malaysia, Vietnam, FSU, US, China
Imports: 
  $266 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  food, fuel oil, consumer goods, manufactures
partners: 
  Thailand, FSU, Japan, France, Vietnam, China
External debt: 
  $1.1 billion (1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 12% (1991 est.); accounts for about 18% of GDP (1991 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  226,000 kW
production: 
  990 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  220 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tin and gypsum mining, timber, electric power, agricultural
  processing, construction
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 60% of GDP and employs most of the work force;
  subsistence farming predominates; normally self-sufficient in
  nondrought years; principal crops - rice (80% of cultivated land),
  sweet potatoes, vegetables, corn, coffee, sugarcane, cotton; livestock
  - buffaloes, hogs, cattle, poultry
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis, opium poppy for the international drug
  trade, third-largest opium producer (180 metric tons in 1993)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-79), $276 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $605
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $995 million 
Currency: 
  1 new kip (NK) = 100 at
Exchange rates: 
  new kips (NK) per US$1 - 720 (July 1993). 710 (May 1992), 710
  (December 1991), 700 (September 1990), 576 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Laos, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  27,527 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 1,856 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, improved earth 7,451 km; unimproved earth
  18,220 km (often impassable during rainy season mid-May to
  mid-September)
Inland waterways: 
  about 4,587 km, primarily Mekong and tributaries; 2,897 additional
  kilometers are sectionally navigable by craft drawing less than 0.5 m
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 136 km 
Ports: 
  none
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,370 GRT/3,000 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  53 
usable: 
  41 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  8 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  15 
Telecommunications: 
  service to general public practically non-existant; radio
  communications network provides generally erratic service to
  government users; 7,390 telephones (1986); broadcast stations - 10 AM,
  no FM, 1 TV; 1 satellite earth station

@Laos, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Lao People's Army (LPA; including naval, aviation, and militia
  elements), Air Force, National Police Department 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,015,357; fit for military service 547,566; reach
  military age (18) annually 49,348 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Latvia, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Europe, bordering on the Baltic Sea, between Sweden and Russia
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Asia, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  64,100 sq km 
land area: 
  64,100 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than West Virginia
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,078 km, Belarus 141 km, Estonia 267 km, Lithuania 453 km,
  Russia 217 km 
Coastline: 
  531 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  the Abrene section of border ceded by the Latvian Soviet Socialist
  Republic to Russia in 1944
Climate: 
  maritime; wet, moderate winters
Terrain: 
  low plain
Natural resources: 
  minimal; amber, peat, limestone, dolomite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  27% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  13% 
forest and woodland: 
  39% 
other: 
  21% 
Irrigated land: 
  160 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air and water pollution because of a lack of waste conversion
  equipment; Gulf of Riga and Daugava River heavily polluted;
  contamination of soil and groundwater with chemicals and petroleum
  products at military bases
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Hazardous Wastes, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified
  - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Latvia, People

Population: 
  2,749,211 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.5% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.84 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.61 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.74 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  21.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.44 years 
male: 
  64.37 years 
female: 
  74.75 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.98 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Latvian(s) 
adjective: 
  Latvian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Latvian 51.8%, Russian 33.8%, Byelorussian 4.5%, Ukrainian 3.4%,
  Polish 2.3%, other 4.2% 
Religions: 
  Lutheran, Roman Catholic, Russian Orthodox 
Languages: 
  Lettish (official), Lithuanian, Russian, other 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  1.407 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 41%, agriculture and forestry 16%, other 43%
  (1990)

@Latvia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Latvia 
conventional short form: 
  Latvia 
local long form: 
  Latvijas Republika 
local short form: 
  Latvija 
former: 
  Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  LG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Riga 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 counties (singular - rajons) and 7 municipalities*: Aizkraukles
  Rajons, Aluksnes Rajons, Balvu Rajons, Bauskas Rajons, Cesu Rajons,
  Daugavpils*, Daugavpils Rajons, Dobeles Rajons, Gulbenes Rajons,
  Jekabpils Rajons, Jelgava*, Jelgavas Rajons, Jurmala*, Kraslavas
  Rajons, Kuldigas Rajons, Leipaja*, Liepajas Rajons, Limbazu Rajons,
  Ludzas Rajons, Madonas Rajons, Ogres Rajons, Preiju Rajons, Rezekne*,
  Rezeknes Rajons, Riga*, Rigas Rajons, Saldus Rajons, Talsu Rajons,
  Tukuma Rajons, Valkas Rajons, Valmieras Rajons, Ventspils*, Ventspils
  Rajons
Independence: 
  6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 18 November (1918) 
Constitution: 
  newly elected Parliament in 1993 restored the 1933 constitution
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Guntis ULMANIS (since 7 July 1993); Saeima elected President
  ULMANIS in the third round of balloting on 7 July 1993
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Valdis BIRKAVS (since 20 July 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the Supreme Council
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Saeima): 
  elections last held 5-6 June 1993 (next to be held NA June 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (100 total) LC 36, LNNK
  15, Concord for Latvia 13, LZS 12, Equal Rights 7, LKDS 6, TUB 6, DCP
  5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Latvian Way Union (LC), Valdis BIRKAVS; Latvian Farmers Union (LZS),
  Alvars BERKIS; Latvian National Independence Movement (LNNK), Andrejs
  KRASTINS, Aristids LAMBERGS, cochairmen; Concord for Latvia, Janis
  JURKANS; Equal Rights, Sergejs DIMANIS; Christian Democrat Union
  (LKDS), Peteris CIMDINS, Andris SAULITIS, Janis RUSKO; Fatherland and
  Freedom (TUB), Maris GRINBLATS, Roberts MILBERGS, Oigerts DZENTIS;
  Democratic Center (DCP), Ints CALITIS; Popular Front of Latvia (LTF),
  Uldis AUGSTKALNS
Member of: 
  BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE (guest), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ITU, LORCS, NACC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ojars Eriks KALNINS 
chancery: 
  4325 17th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011 
telephone: 
  (202) 726-8213 and 8214 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ints M, SILINS 
embassy: 
  Raina Boulevard 7, Riga 226050 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  46-9-882-0046 
FAX: 
  46-9-882-0047 
Flag: 
  two horizontal bands of maroon (top and bottom), white (middle,
  narrower than other two bands)

@Latvia, Economy

Overview: 
  Latvia is rapidly becoming a dynamic market economy, rivaled only by
  Estonia among the former Soviet states in the speed of its
  transformation. The transition has been painful with GDP falling over
  45% in 1992-93, according to official statistics, and industrial
  production experiencing even steeper declines. Nevertheless, the
  government's tough monetary policies and reform program, which foster
  the development of the private sector and market mechanisms, have kept
  inflation low, created a dynamic private sector - much of which is not
  captured in official statistics - and expanded trade ties with the
  West. Much of agriculture is already privatized and the government
  plans to step up the pace of privatization of state enterprises. The
  economy is now poised for recovery and will benefit from the country's
  strategic location on the Baltic Sea, its well-educated population,
  and its diverse - albeit largely obsolete - industrial structure.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $13.2 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Latvian statistics, which are very
  uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,810 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% per month (1993 average)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.6% (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $429 million from non-FSU countries (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  oil products, timber, ferrous metals, dairy products, furniture,
  textiles
partners: 
  Russia, other CIS countries, Western Europe
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  fuels, cars, ferrous metals, chemicals
partners: 
  Russia, other CIS countries, Western Europe
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -38% (1992 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,140,000 kW
production: 
  5.8 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,125 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  employs 41% of labor force; highly diversified; dependent on imports
  for energy, raw materials, and intermediate products; produces buses,
  vans, street and railroad cars, synthetic fibers, agricultural
  machinery, fertilizers, washing machines, radios, electronics,
  pharmaceuticals, processed foods, textiles
Agriculture: 
  employs 16% of labor force; principally dairy farming and livestock
  feeding; products - meat, milk, eggs, grain, sugar beets, potatoes,
  vegetables; fishing and fish packing
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for illicit drugs from Central and Southwest Asia
  and Latin America to Western Europe; limited producer of illicit
  opium; mostly for domestic consumption; also produces illicit
  amphetamines for export
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 lat = 100 cents; introduced NA March 1993
Exchange rates: 
  lats per US$1 - 0.5917 (January 1994), 1.32 (March 1993)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Latvia, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,400 km (1,524-mm gauge); 270 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  59,500 km 
paved and graveled: 
  33,000 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 26,500 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  300 km perennially navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 750 km; refined products 780 km; natural gas 560 km (1992)
Ports: 
  coastal - Riga, Ventspils, Liepaja; inland - Daugavpils
Merchant marine: 
  93 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 850,840 GRT/1,107,403 DWT, cargo
  15, container 2, oil tanker 41, refrigerated cargo 27,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 8 
Airports: 
total: 
  50 
usable: 
  15 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  7 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  Latvia is better provided with telephone service than most of the
  other former Soviet republics; subscriber circuits 660,000; subscriber
  density 240 per 1,000 persons (1993); an NMT-450 analog cellular
  telephone network covers 75% of Latvia's population; international
  traffic carried by leased connection to the Moscow international
  gateway switch and through the new Ericsson AXE local/transit digital
  telephone exchange in Riga and through the Finnish cellular net;
  electronic mail capability by Sprint data network; broadcasting
  services NA

@Latvia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force, Security Forces (internal and border
  troops), Border Guard,  Home Guard (Zemessardze) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 652,444; fit for military service 514,055; reach
  military age (18) annually 18,803 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  176 million rubles, 3%-5% of GDP; note - conversion of the military
  budget into US dollars using the prevailing exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Lebanon

Header
Note: 
  Lebanon has made progress toward rebuilding its political institutions
  and regaining its national sovereignty since the end of the
  devastating 16-year civil war in October 1990. Under the Ta'if accord
  - the blueprint for national reconciliation - the Lebanese have
  established a more equitable political system, particularly by giving
  Muslims a greater say in the political process. Since December 1990,
  the Lebanese have formed three cabinets and conducted the first
  legislative election in 20 years. Most of the militias have been
  weakened or disbanded. The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) has seized vast
  quantities of weapons used by the militias during the war and extended
  central government authority over about one-half of the country.
  Hizballah, the radical Sh'ia party, retains most of its weapons.
  Foreign forces still occupy areas of Lebanon. Israel maintains troops
  in southern Lebanon and continues to support a proxy militia, The Army
  of South Lebanon (ASL), along a narrow stretch of territory contiguous
  to its border. The ASL's enclave encompasses this self-declared
  security zone and about 20 kilometers north to the strategic town of
  Jazzine. As of December 1993, Syria maintained about 30,000-35,000
  troops in Lebanon. These troops are based mainly in Beirut, North
  Lebanon, and the Bekaa Valley. Syria's deployment was legitimized by
  the Arab League early in Lebanon's civil war and in the Ta'if accord.
  Citing the continued weakness of the LAF, Beirut's requests, and
  failure of the Lebanese Government to implement all of the
  constitutional reforms in the Ta'if accord, Damascus has so far
  refused to withdraw its troops from Beirut.

@Lebanon, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, in the eastern Mediterranean Sea, between Israel and
  Syria
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  10,400 sq km 
land area: 
  10,230 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.8 times the size of Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  total 454 km, Israel 79 km, Syria 375 km 
Coastline: 
  225 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  separated from Israel by the 1949 Armistice Line; Israeli troops in
  southern Lebanon since June 1982; Syrian troops in northern, central,
  and eastern Lebanon since October 1976
Climate: 
  Mediterranean; mild to cool, wet winters with hot, dry summers;
  Lebanon mountains experience heavy winter snows
Terrain: 
  narrow coastal plain; Al Biqa' (Bekaa Valley) separates Lebanon and
  Anti-Lebanon Mountains
Natural resources: 
  limestone, iron ore, salt, water-surplus state in a water-deficit
  region 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  21% 
permanent crops: 
  9% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  8% 
other: 
  61% 
Irrigated land: 
  860 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; air and water pollution
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation
Note: 
  Nahr al Litani only major river in Near East not crossing an
  international boundary; rugged terrain historically helped isolate,
  protect, and develop numerous factional groups based on religion,
  clan, and ethnicity

@Lebanon, People

Population: 
  3,620,395 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.98% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  27.89 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.55 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  39.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.35 years 
male: 
  66.92 years 
female: 
  71.9 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.39 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Lebanese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Lebanese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab 95%, Armenian 4%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Islam 70% (5 legally recognized Islamic groups - Alawite or Nusayri,
  Druze, Isma'ilite, Shi'a, Sunni), Christian 30% (11 legally recognized
  Christian groups - 4 Orthodox Christian, 6 Catholic, 1 Protestant),
  Judaism NEGL%
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), French (official), Armenian, English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  80% 
male: 
  88% 
female: 
  73% 
Labor force: 
  650,000 
by occupation: 
  industry, commerce, and services 79%, agriculture 11%, government 10%
  (1985)

@Lebanon, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Lebanon 
conventional short form: 
  Lebanon 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Lubnaniyah 
local short form: 
  none 
Digraph: 
  LE
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Beirut 
Administrative divisions: 
  5 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Biqa, 'Al Janub,
  Ash Shamal, Bayrut, Jabal Lubnan
Independence: 
  22 November 1943 (from League of Nations mandate under French
  administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 22 November (1943) 
Constitution: 
  23 May 1926, amended a number of times
Legal system: 
  mixture of Ottoman law, canon law, Napoleonic code, and civil law; no
  judicial review of legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; compulsory for all males; authorized for women at age
  21 with elementary education
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Ilyas HARAWI (since 24 November 1989); note - by custom, the
  president is a Maronite Christian, the prime minister is a Sunni
  Muslim, and the speaker of the legislature is a Shi'a Muslim
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Rafiq HARIRI (since 22 October 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; chosen by the president in consultation with the members of
  the National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  (Arabic - Majlis Alnuwab, French - Assemblee Nationale) Lebanon's
  first legislative election in 20 years was held in the summer of 1992;
  the National Assembly is composed of 128 deputies, one-half Christian
  and one-half Muslim; its mandate expires in 1996
Judicial branch: 
  four Courts of Cassation (three courts for civil and commercial cases
  and one court for criminal cases)
Political parties and leaders: 
  political party activity is organized along largely sectarian lines;
  numerous political groupings exist, consisting of individual political
  figures and followers motivated by religious, clan, and economic
  considerations
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACCT, AFESD, AL, AMF, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Riad TABBARAH 
chancery: 
  2560 28th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-6300 
FAX: 
  (202) 939-6324 
consulate(s) general: 
  Detroit, New York, and Los Angeles 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mark HAMBLEY 
mailing embassy: 
  Antelias, Beirut 
address: 
  P. O. Box 70-840, PSC 815, Box 2, Beirut; FPO AE 09836-0002 
telephone: 
  [961] 417774 or 415802 through 415803, 402200, 403300 
FAX: 
  [961] (1) 407-112 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of red (top), white (double width), and red
  with a green and brown cedar tree centered in the white band

@Lebanon, Economy

Overview: 
  Since 1975 civil war has seriously damaged Lebanon's economic
  infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but ended
  Lebanon's position as a Middle Eastern entrepot and banking hub.
  Following October 1990, however, a tentative peace has enabled the
  central government to begin restoring control in Beirut, collect
  taxes, and regain access to key port and government facilities. The
  battered economy has also been propped up by a financially sound
  banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale manufacturers.
  Family remittances, banking transactions, manufactured and farm
  exports, the narcotics trade, and international emergency aid are the
  main sources of foreign exchange. In the relatively settled year of
  1991, industrial production, agricultural output, and exports showed
  substantial gains. The further rebuilding of the war-ravaged country
  was delayed in 1992 because of an upturn in political wrangling. In
  October 1992, Rafiq HARIRI was appointed Prime Minister. HARIRI, a
  wealthy entrepreneur, has announced ambitious plans for Lebanon's
  reconstruction which involve a substantial influx of foreign aid and
  investment. Progress on restoring basic services is limited. Since
  Prime Minister HARIRI's appointment, the most significant improvement
  lies in the stabilization of the Lebanese pound, which had gained over
  30% in value by yearend 1993. The year 1993 was marked by efforts of
  the new administration to encourage domestic and foreign investment
  and to obtain additional international assistance.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $6.1 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.2% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $1,720 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  35% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  35% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $990 million 
expenditures: 
  $1.98 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $925 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  agricultural products, chemicals, textiles, precious and semiprecious
  metals and jewelry, metals and metal products
partners: 
  Saudi Arabia 21%, Switzerland 9.5%, Jordan 6%, Kuwait 12%, US 5%
Imports: 
  $4.1 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  Consumer goods, machinery and transport equipment, petroleum products
partners: 
  Italy 14%, France 12%, US 6%, Turkey 5%, Saudi Arabia 3%
External debt: 
  $700 million (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 25% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,300,000 kW
production: 
  3.413 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  990 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  banking, food processing, textiles, cement, oil refining, chemicals,
  jewelry, some metal fabricating
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about one-third of GDP; principal products - citrus
  fruits, vegetables, potatoes, olives, tobacco, hemp (hashish), sheep,
  goats; not self-sufficient in grain
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of hashish and heroin for the international drug
  trade; hashish production is shipped to Western Europe, the Middle
  East, and North and South America; increasingly a key locus of cocaine
  processing and trafficking
Economic aid: 
  aid for Lebanon's reconstruction programs currently totals $1.3
  billion since October 1992, including a $175 million loan from the
  World Bank
Currency: 
  1 Lebanese pound (#L) = 100 piasters
Exchange rates: 
  Lebanese pounds (#L) per US$1 - 1,713.00 (December 1993), 2,200.00
  (1992), 928.23 (1991), 695.09 (1990), 496.69 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Lebanon, Communications

Railroads: 
  system in disrepair, considered inoperable
Highways: 
total: 
  7,300 km 
paved: 
  6,200 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 450 km; improved earth 650 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 72 km (none in operation)
Ports: 
  Beirut, Tripoli, Ra'Sil'ata, Juniyah, Sidon, Az Zahrani, Tyre, Jubayl,
  Shikka Jadidah
Merchant marine: 
  63 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 268,268 GRT/399,054 DWT, bulk 4,
  cargo 39, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk 1, container 2,
  livestock carrier 9, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2,
  specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 2, combination ore/oil 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  9 
usable: 
  7 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  telecommunications system severely damaged by civil war; rebuilding
  still underway; 325,000 telephones (95 telephones per 1,000 persons);
  domestic traffic carried primarily by microwave radio relay and a
  small amount of cable; international traffic by satellite - 1 Indian
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station and 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station (erratic operations), coaxial cable to Syria; microwave radio
  relay to Syria but inoperable beyond Syria to Jordan, 3 submarine
  coaxial cables; broadcast stations - 5 AM, 3 FM, 13 TV (numerous AM
  and FM stations are operated sporadically by various factions)

@Lebanon, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF; including Army, Navy, and Air Force)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 827,267; fit for military service 514,291 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $271 million, 8.2% of GDP (1992 budget)


@Lesotho, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, an enclave of South Africa
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  30,350 sq km 
land area: 
  30,350 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 909 km, South Africa 909 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; cool to cold, dry winters; hot, wet summers
Terrain: 
  mostly highland with some plateaus, hills, and mountains
Natural resources: 
  water, agricultural and grazing land, some diamonds and other minerals
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  66% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  24% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  population pressure forcing settlement in marginal areas results in
  overgrazing, severe soil erosion, soil exhaustion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  subject to periods of drought
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping
Note: 
  landlocked; surrounded by South Africa; Highlands Water Project will
  control, store, and redirect water to South Africa
Population: 
  1,944,493 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.48% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  34 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.19 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  69.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  62.14 years 
male: 
  60.32 years 
female: 
  64.01 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.5 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mosotho (singular), Basotho (plural) 
adjective: 
  Basotho 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Sotho 99.7%, Europeans 1,600, Asians 800
Religions: 
  Christian 80%, rest indigenous beliefs
Languages: 
  Sesotho (southern Sotho), English (official), Zulu, Xhosa 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1966)
total population: 
  59% 
male: 
  44% 
female: 
  68% 
Labor force: 
  689,000 economically active
by occupation: 
  86.2% of resident population engaged in subsistence agriculture;
  roughly 60% of active male labor force works in South Africa

@Lesotho, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Lesotho 
conventional short form: 
  Lesotho 
former: 
  Basutoland 
Digraph: 
  LT
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Maseru 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 districts; Berea, Butha-Buthe, Leribe, Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohale's
  Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha's Nek, Quthing, Thaba-Tseka
Independence: 
  4 October 1966 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 4 October (1966) 
Constitution: 
  2 April 1993
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and Roman-Dutch law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in High Court and Court of Appeal; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King LETSIE III (since 12 November 1990) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Ntsu MOKHEHLE (since 2 April 1993 ) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament consisting of the Assembly or lower house whose
  members are chosen by popular election and the Senate or upper house
  whose members consist of the 22 principal chiefs and 10 other members
  appointed by the ruling party;  election held in March 1993 (first
  since 1971); all 65 seats in the Assembly were won by the BCP
Judicial branch: 
  High Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Basotho National Party (BNP), Evaristus SEKHONYANA; Basutholand
  Congress Party (BCP), Ntsu MOKHEHLE; National Independent Party (NIP),
  A. C. MANYELI; Marematlou Freedom Party (MFP), Vincent MALEBO; United
  Democratic Party, Charles MOFELI; Communist Party of Lesotho (CPL),
  Jacob M. KENA
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Teboho KITLELI 
chancery: 
  2511 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 797-5533 through 5536 
FAX: 
  (202) 234-6815 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Karl HOFMANN 
embassy: 
  address NA, Maseru 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 333, Maseru 100, Lesotho 
telephone: 
  [266] 312-666 
FAX: 
  [266] 310-116 
Flag: 
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side corner; the upper half is
  white bearing the brown silhouette of a large shield with crossed
  spear and club; the lower half is a diagonal blue band with a green
  triangle in the corner

@Lesotho, Economy

Overview: 
  Small, landlocked, and mountainous, Lesotho has no important natural
  resources other than water. Its economy is based on agriculture, light
  manufacturing, and remittances from laborers employed in South Africa
  (recently equal to about 45% of GDP). The great majority of households
  gain their livelihoods from subsistence farming and migrant labor; a
  large portion of the adult male workforce is employed in South African
  mines. Manufacturing depends largely on farm products to support the
  milling, canning, leather, and jute industries; other industries
  include textile, clothing, and construction (in particular, a major
  water improvement project which will permit the sale of water to South
  Africa). Industry's share of GDP rose from 6% in 1982 to 13% in 1991.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.4% (FY 93)
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  17% (FY93)
Unemployment rate: 
  at least 55% among adult males (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $438 million 
expenditures: 
  $430 million, including capital expenditures of $155 million (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $109 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  wool, mohair, wheat, cattle, peas, beans, corn, hides, skins, baskets
partners: 
  South Africa 42%, EC 28%, North and South America 25% (1991)
Imports: 
  $964 million (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  mainly corn, building materials, clothing, vehicles, machinery,
  medicines, petroleum
partners: 
  South Africa 94%, Asia 3%, EC 1% (1991)
External debt: 
  $428 million (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5% (1991 est.); accounts for 13% of GDP
Electricity: 
  power supplied by South Africa
Industries: 
  food, beverages, textiles, handicrafts, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 15% of GDP (1991 est.) and employs 60-70% of all
  households; exceedingly primitive, mostly subsistence farming and
  livestock; principal crops corn, wheat, pulses, sorghum, barley
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $268 million; US (1992),
  $10.3 million; US (1993 est.), $10.1 million; Western (non-US)
  countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $819 million;
  OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $4 million; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $14 million 
Currency: 
  1 loti (L) = 100 lisente
Exchange rates: 
  maloti (M) per US$1 - 3.4096 (January 1994), 3.2636 (1993), 2.8497
  (1992), 2.7563 (1991), 2.5863 (1990), 2.6166 (1989); note - the
  Basotho loti is at par with the South African rand
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Lesotho, Communications

Railroads: 
  2.6 km; owned, operated by, and included in the statistics of South
  Africa
Highways: 
total: 
  7,215 km 
paved: 
  572 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, stabilized earth 2,337 km; improved earth 1,806 km; unimproved
  earth 2,500 km (1988)
Airports: 
total: 
  28 
usable: 
  28 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  rudimentary system consisting of a few landlines, a small microwave
  system, and minor radio communications stations; 5,920 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 3 AM, 2 FM, 1 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@Lesotho, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Lesotho Defense Force (RLDF; including Army, Air Wing), Royal
  Lesotho Mounted Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 438,096; fit for military service 236,324 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $55 million, 13% of GDP (1990 est.)


@Liberia, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Pacific Ocean between Cote
  d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  111,370 sq km 
land area: 
  96,320 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Tennessee
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,585 km, Guinea 563 km, Cote d'Ivoire 716 km, Sierra Leone 306
  km 
Coastline: 
  579 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; dry winters with hot days and cool to cold
  nights; wet, cloudy summers with frequent heavy showers
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to rolling coastal plains rising to rolling plateau and
  low mountains in northeast
Natural resources: 
  iron ore, timber, diamonds, gold 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  2% 
forest and woodland: 
  39% 
other: 
  55% 
Irrigated land: 
  20 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  West Africa's largest tropical rain forest, subject to deforestation;
  soil erosion; loss of biodiversity
natural hazards: 
  dust-laden harmattan winds blow from the Sahara (December to March)
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation

@Liberia, People

Population: 
  2,972,766 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.33% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.48 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.34 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  113.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  57.73 years 
male: 
  55.27 years 
female: 
  60.25 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.36 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Liberian(s) 
adjective: 
  Liberian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  indigenous African tribes 95% (including Kpelle, Bassa, Gio, Kru,
  Grebo, Mano, Krahn, Gola, Gbandi, Loma, Kissi, Vai, and Bella),
  Americo-Liberians 5% (descendants of repatriated slaves)
Religions: 
  traditional 70%, Muslim 20%, Christian 10% 
Languages: 
  English 20% (official), Niger-Congo language group about 20 local
  languages come from this group
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  40% 
male: 
  50% 
female: 
  29% 
Labor force: 
  510,000 including 220,000 in the monetary economy
by occupation: 
  agriculture 70.5%, services 10.8%, industry and commerce 4.5%, other
  14.2%
note: 
  non-African foreigners hold about 95% of the top-level management and
  engineering jobs; 52% of population of working age

@Liberia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Liberia 
conventional short form: 
  Liberia 
Digraph: 
  LI
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Monrovia 
Administrative divisions: 
  13 counties; Bomi, Bong, Grand Bassa, Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh, Grand
  Kru, Lofa, Margibi, Maryland, Montserrado, Nimba, River Cess, Sinoe
Independence: 
  26 July 1847 
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 26 July (1847) 
Constitution: 
  6 January 1986
Legal system: 
  dual system of statutory law based on Anglo-American common law for
  the modern sector and customary law based on unwritten tribal
  practices for indigenous sector
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Chairman of the Council of State David KPOMAKPOR (since March 1994);
  election last held on 15 October 1985 (next scheduled to be held
  September 1994); results - Gen. Dr. Samuel Kanyon DOE (NDPL) 50.9%,
  Jackson DOE (LAP) 26.4%, other 22.7%; note - President Doe was killed
  by rebel forces on 9 September 1990
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; selected by the leaders of the major factions in the civil
  war
note: 
  a transitional coalition government was formed as part of a July 1993
  Cotonou Peace Treaty negotiated under UN auspices by the leaders of
  the major factions in the civil war; elections now scheduled for
  September 1994
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Transitional Legislative Assembly, the members of which are
  appointed by the leaders of the major factions in the civil war
note: 
  the former bicameral legislature no longer exists and there is no
  assurance that it will ever be reconstituted
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL), Augustus CAINE, chairman;
  Liberian Action Party (LAP), Emmanuel KOROMAH, chairman; Unity Party
  (UP), Joseph KOFA, chairman; United People's Party (UPP), Gabriel
  Baccus MATTHEWS, chairman; National Patriotic Party (NPP), Charles
  TAYLOR, chairman; Liberian Peoples Party (LPP), Dusty WOLOKOLLIE,
  chairman
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user),
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Konah K. BLACKETT 
chancery: 
  5201 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011 
telephone: 
  (202) 723-0437 through 0440 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d' Affaires William P. TWADDELL 
embassy: 
  111 United Nations Drive, Monrovia 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 100098, Mamba Point, Monrovia, or APO AE 09813 
telephone: 
  [231] 222991 through 222994 
FAX: 
  [231] 223710 
Flag: 
  11 equal horizontal stripes of red (top and bottom) alternating with
  white; there is a white five-pointed star on a blue square in the
  upper hoist-side corner; the design was based on the US flag

@Liberia, Economy

Overview: 
  Civil war since 1990 has destroyed much of Liberia's economy,
  especially the infrastructure in and around Monrovia. Businessmen have
  fled the country, taking capital and expertise with them. Many will
  not return. Richly endowed with water, mineral resources, forests, and
  a climate favorable to agriculture, Liberia had been a producer and
  exporter of basic products, while local manufacturing, mainly foreign
  owned, had been small in scope. Political instability threatens
  prospects for economic reconstruction and repatriation of some 750,000
  Liberian refugees who have fled to neighboring countries. The
  political impasse between the interim government and rebel leader
  Charles Taylor has prevented restoration of normal economic life,
  including the re-establishment of a strong central government with
  effective economic development programs.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.5% (1988)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  12% (1989)
Unemployment rate: 
  43% urban (1988)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $242.1 million 
expenditures: 
  $435.4 million, including capital expenditures of $29.5 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $505 million (f.o.b., 1989 est.)
commodities: 
  iron ore 61%, rubber 20%, timber 11%, coffee
partners: 
  US, EC, Netherlands
Imports: 
  $394 million (c.i.f., 1989 est.)
commodities: 
  rice, mineral fuels, chemicals, machinery, transportation equipment,
  other foodstuffs
partners: 
  US, EC, Japan, China, Netherlands, ECOWAS
External debt: 
  $2.1 billion (September 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA% (1993-94); much industrial damage caused by factional
  warfare
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  410,000 kW
production: 
  750 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  275 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  rubber processing, food processing, construction materials, furniture,
  palm oil processing, mining (iron ore, diamonds)
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 40% of GDP (including fishing and forestry);
  principal products - rubber, timber, coffee, cocoa, rice, cassava,
  palm oil, sugarcane, bananas, sheep, goats; not self-sufficient in
  food, imports 25% of rice consumption
Illicit drugs: 
  increasingly a transshipment point for heroin and cocaine
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $665 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $870
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $25 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $77 million 
Currency: 
  1 Liberian dollar (L$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Liberian dollars (L$) per US$1 - 1.00 (officially fixed rate since
  1940); unofficial parallel exchange rate of L$7 = US$1, January 1992
  (unofficial rate floats against the US dollar)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Liberia, Communications

Railroads: 
  480 km total; 328 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, 152 km 1.067-meter
  narrow gauge; all lines single track; rail systems owned and operated
  by foreign steel and financial interests in conjunction with Liberian
  Government
Highways: 
total: 
  10,087 km 
paved: 
  603 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 5,171 km (includes 2323km of private roads of rubber and timber
  firms, open to the public); earth 4,313 km 
Ports: 
  Monrovia, Buchanan, Greenville, Harper (or Cape Palmas)
Merchant marine: 
  1,595 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 56,923,236 GRT/97,692,316
  DWT, barge carrier 3, bulk 423, cargo 126, chemical 122, combination
  bulk 30, combination ore/oil 64, container 112, liquefied gas 67, oil
  tanker 468, passenger 32, refrigerated cargo 61, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 19, short-sea passenger 2, specialized tanker 7, vehicle carrier
  59 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry; all ships are foreign owned; the top 4
  owning flags are US 14%, Japan 13%, Norway 10%, and Hong Kong 8%
Airports: 
total: 
  59 
usable: 
  41 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone and telegraph service via radio relay network; main center
  is Monrovia; broadcast stations - 3 AM, 4 FM, 5 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station; most telecommunications services inoperable
  due to insurgency movement

@Liberia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  the ultimate structure of the Liberian military force will depend on
  who is the victor in the ongoing civil war
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 707,927; fit for military service 377,950 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Libya, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, on the southern coast of the Mediterranean Sea,
  between Egypt and Tunisia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,759,540 sq km 
land area: 
  1,759,540 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Alaska
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,383 km, Algeria 982 km, Chad 1,055 km, Egypt 1,150 km, Niger
  354 km, Sudan 383 km, Tunisia 459 km 
Coastline: 
  1,770 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
Gulf of Sidra closing line: 
  32 degrees 30 minutes north
International disputes: 
  the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled in February 1994 that
  the 100,000 sq km Aozou Strip between Chad and Libya belongs to Chad,
  and that Libya must withdraw from it by 31 May 1994; Libya had
  withdrawn its forces in response to the ICJ ruling, but as of June
  1994 still maintained an airfield in the disputed area; maritime
  boundary dispute with Tunisia; claims part of northern Niger and part
  of southeastern Algeria
Climate: 
  Mediterranean along coast; dry, extreme desert interior
Terrain: 
  mostly barren, flat to undulating plains, plateaus, depressions
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, gypsum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  8% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  90% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,420 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification; sparse natural surface-water resources; the Great
  Manmade River Project, the largest water development scheme in the
  world, is being built to bring water from large aquifers under the
  Sahara to coastal cities
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dust-laden ghibli is a southern wind lasting one to four
  days in spring and fall
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the
  Sea

@Libya, People

Population: 
  5,057,392 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.72% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.29 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.14 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  63.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  63.88 years 
male: 
  61.73 years 
female: 
  66.13 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.38 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Libyan(s) 
adjective: 
  Libyan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Berber and Arab 97%, Greeks, Maltese, Italians, Egyptians, Pakistanis,
  Turks, Indians, Tunisians 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 97% 
Languages: 
  Arabic, Italian, English, all are widely understood in the major
  cities
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  64% 
male: 
  75% 
female: 
  50% 
Labor force: 
  1 million (includes about 280,000 resident foreigners)
by occupation: 
  industry 31%, services 27%, government 24%, agriculture 18%

@Libya, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
conventional short form: 
  Libya 
local long form: 
  Al Jumahiriyah al Arabiyah al Libiyah ash Shabiyah al Ishirakiyah 
local short form: 
  none 
Digraph: 
  LY
Type: 
  Jamahiriya (a state of the masses) in theory, governed by the populace
  through local councils; in fact, a military dictatorship
Capital: 
  Tripoli 
Administrative divisions: 
  25 municipalities (baladiyah, singular - baladiyat); Ajdabiya, Al
  'Aziziyah, Al Fatih, Al Jabal al Akhdar, Al Jufrah, Al Khums, Al
  Kufrah, An Nuqat al Khams, Ash Shati', Awbari, Az Zawiyah, Banghazi,
  Darnah, Ghadamis, Gharyan, Misratah, Murzuq, Sabha, Sawfajjin, Surt,
  Tarabulus, Tarhunah, Tubruq, Yafran, Zlitan
Independence: 
  24 December 1951 (from Italy)
National holiday: 
  Revolution Day, 1 September (1969) 
Constitution: 
  11 December 1969, amended 2 March 1977
Legal system: 
  based on Italian civil law system and Islamic law; separate religious
  courts; no constitutional provision for judicial review of legislative
  acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Revolutionary Leader Col. Mu'ammar Abu Minyar al-QADHAFI (since 1
  September 1969) 
head of government: 
  Chairman of the General People's Committee (Premier) Abd al Majid
  al-Qa'ud (since 29 January 1994) 
cabinet: 
  General People's Committee; established by the General People's
  Congress
note: 
  national elections are indirect through a hierarchy of peoples'
  committees
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
General People's Congress: 
  national elections are indirect through a hierarchy of peoples'
  committees
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Other political or pressure groups: 
  various Arab nationalist movements with almost negligible memberships
  may be functioning clandestinely, as well as some Islamic elements
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OAU, OIC, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none
US diplomatic representation: 
  none
Flag: 
  plain green; green is the traditional color of Islam (the state
  religion)

@Libya, Economy

Overview: 
  The socialist-oriented economy depends primarily upon revenues from
  the oil sector, which contributes practically all export earnings and
  about one-third of GDP. In 1990 per capita GDP was the highest in
  Africa at $5,410, but GDP growth rates have slowed and fluctuate
  sharply in response to changes in the world oil market. Import
  restrictions and inefficient resource allocations have led to
  shortages of basic goods and foodstuffs. Windfall revenues from the
  hike in world oil prices in late 1990 improved the foreign payments
  position and resulted in a current account surplus through 1992. The
  nonoil manufacturing and construction sectors, which account for about
  20% of GDP, have expanded from processing mostly agricultural products
  to include petrochemicals, iron, steel, and aluminum. Although
  agriculture accounts for only 5% of GDP, it employs about 20% of the
  labor force. Climatic conditions and poor soils severely limit farm
  output, and Libya imports about 75% of its food requirements. The UN
  sanctions imposed in April 1992 have not yet had a major impact on the
  economy because Libya's oil revenues generate sufficient foreign
  exchange that, along with Libya's large currency reserves, sustain
  food and consumer goods imports as well as equipment for the oil
  industry and ongoing development projects.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $32 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $6,600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $8.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $9.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.1 billion (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $7.7 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil, refined petroleum products, natural gas
partners: 
  Italy, Germany, Spain, France, UK, Turkey, Greece, Egypt
Imports: 
  $8.26 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, transport equipment, food, manufactured goods
partners: 
  Italy, Germany, UK, France, Spain, Turkey, Tunisia, Eastern Europe
External debt: 
  $3.5 billion excluding military debt (1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 10.5% (1990)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  4,935,000 kW
production: 
  14.385 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,952 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, food processing, textiles, handicrafts, cement
Agriculture: 
  5% of GNP; cash crops - wheat, barley, olives, dates, citrus fruits,
  peanuts; 75% of food is imported
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-87), $242 million 
note: 
  no longer a recipient
Currency: 
  1 Libyan dinar (LD) = 1,000 dirhams
Exchange rates: 
  Libyan dinars (LD) per US$1 - 0.3233 (January 1994), 0.3250 (1993),
  0.3013 (1992), 0.2684 (1991), 0.2699 (1990), 0.2922 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year
Railroads: 
  Libya has had no railroad in operation since 1965, all previous
  systems having been dismantled; current plans are to construct a
  standard gauge (1.435 m) line from the Tunisian frontier to Tripoli
  and Misratah, then inland to Sabha, center of a mineral rich area, but
  there has been no progress; other plans made jointly with Egypt would
  establish a rail line from As Sallum, Egypt to Tobruk with completion
  set for mid-1994, progress unknown
Highways: 
total: 
  19,300 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 10,800 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 8,500 km 
Inland waterways: 
  none
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 4,383 km; petroleum products 443 km (includes liquified
  petroleum gas 256 km); natural gas 1,947 km 
Ports: 
  Tobruk, Tripoli, Banghazi, Misratah, Marsa al Burayqah, Ra's Lanuf,
  Ra's al Unif
Merchant marine: 
  31 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 690,703 GRT/1,211,184 DWT, cargo
  10, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas 2, oil tanker 10,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 4, short-sea passenger 4 
Airports: 
total: 
  145 
usable: 
  132 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  57 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  8 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  28 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  52 
Telecommunications: 
  modern telecommunications system using radio relay, coaxial cable,
  tropospheric scatter, and domestic satellite stations; 370,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 17 AM, 3 FM, 12 TV; satellite earth
  stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, and 14
  domestic; submarine cables to France and Italy; radio relay to Tunisia
  and Egypt; tropospheric scatter to Greece; planned ARABSAT and
  Intersputnik satellite stations

@Libya, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Armed Peoples of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah (including Army, Navy,
  Air and Air Defense Command)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,094,052; fit for military service 649,976; reach
  military age (17) annually 52,723 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $3.3 billion, 15% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Liechtenstein, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between Austria and Switzerland
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  160 sq km 
land area: 
  160 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 78 km, Austria 37 km, Switzerland 41 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  claims 620 square miles of Czech territory confiscated from its royal
  family in 1918; the Czech Republic insists that restitution does not
  go back before February 1948, when the Communists seized power
Climate: 
  continental; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow or rain; cool to
  moderately warm, cloudy, humid summers
Terrain: 
  mostly mountainous (Alps) with Rhine Valley in western third
Natural resources: 
  hydroelectric potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  25% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  38% 
forest and woodland: 
  19% 
other: 
  18% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Hazardous
  Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; variety of microclimatic variations based on elevation

@Liechtenstein, People

Population: 
  30,281 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.26% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.08 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.6 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  6.11 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.46 years 
male: 
  73.76 years 
female: 
  81.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.46 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Liechtensteiner(s) 
adjective: 
  Liechtenstein 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Alemannic 95%, Italian and other 5% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 87.3%, Protestant 8.3%, unknown 1.6%, other 2.8% (1988)
Languages: 
  German (official), Alemannic dialect 
Literacy: 
  age 10 and over can read and write (1981)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  19,905 of which 11,933 are foreigners; 6,885 commute from Austria and
  Switzerland to work each day
by occupation: 
  industry, trade, and building 53.2%, services 45%, agriculture,
  fishing, forestry, and horticulture 1.8% (1990)

@Liechtenstein, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Principality of Liechtenstein 
conventional short form: 
  Liechtenstein 
local long form: 
  Furstentum Liechtenstein 
local short form: 
  Liechtenstein 
Digraph: 
  LS
Type: 
  hereditary constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Vaduz 
Administrative divisions: 
  11 communes (gemeinden, singular - gemeinde); Balzers, Eschen,
  Gamprin, Mauren, Planken, Ruggell, Schaan, Schellenberg, Triesen,
  Triesenberg, Vaduz
Independence: 
  23 January 1719 (Imperial Principality of Liechtenstein established)
National holiday: 
  Assumption Day, 15 August 
Constitution: 
  5 October 1921
Legal system: 
  local civil and penal codes; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Prince Hans ADAM II (since 13 November 1989; assumed executive powers
  26 August 1984); Heir Apparent Prince ALOIS von und zu Liechtenstein
  (born 11 June 1968) 
head of government: 
  Mario FRICK (since 15 December 1993); Deputy Head of Government Dr.
  Thomas BUECHEL (since 15 December 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; elected by the Diet; confirmed by the sovereign
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Diet (Landtag): 
  elections last held on 24 October 1993 (next to be held by March
  1997); results - VU 50.1%, FBP 41.3%, FL 8.5%; seats - (25 total) VU
  13, FBP 11, FL 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Oberster Gerichtshof) for criminal cases, Superior
  Court (Obergericht) for civil cases
Political parties and leaders: 
  Fatherland Union (VU), Dr. Otto HASLER; Progressive Citizens' Party
  (FBP), Emanuel VOGT; Free Electoral List (FL)
Member of: 
  CE, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, IAEA, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS,
  UN, UNCTAD, UPU, WCL, WIPO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  in routine diplomatic matters, Liechtenstein is represented in the US
  by the Swiss Embassy
US diplomatic representation: 
  the US has no diplomatic or consular mission in Liechtenstein, but the
  US Consul General at Zurich (Switzerland) has consular accreditation
  at Vaduz
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with a gold crown on
  the hoist side of the blue band

@Liechtenstein, Economy

Overview: 
  The prosperous economy is based primarily on small-scale light
  industry and tourism. Industry accounts for 53% of total employment,
  the service sector 45% (mostly based on tourism), and agriculture and
  forestry 2%. The sale of postage stamps to collectors is estimated at
  $10 million annually. Low business taxes (the maximum tax rate is 20%)
  and easy incorporation rules have induced about 25,000 holding or
  so-called letter box companies to establish nominal offices in
  Liechtenstein. Such companies, incorporated solely for tax purposes,
  provide 30% of state revenues. The economy is tied closely to
  Switzerland's economy in a customs union, and incomes and living
  standards parallel those of the more prosperous Swiss groups.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $630 million (1990 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $22,300 (1990 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5.4% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  1.5% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $259 million 
expenditures: 
  $292 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1990 est.)
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  small specialty machinery, dental products, stamps, hardware, pottery
partners: 
  EFTA countries 20.9% (Switzerland 15.4%), EC countries 42.7%, other
  36.4% (1990)
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  machinery, metal goods, textiles, foodstuffs, motor vehicles
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  23,000 kW
production: 
  150 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,230 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  electronics, metal manufacturing, textiles, ceramics, pharmaceuticals,
  food products, precision instruments, tourism
Agriculture: 
  livestock, vegetables, corn, wheat, potatoes, grapes
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Swiss franc, franken, or franco (SwF) = 100 centimes, rappen, or
  centesimi
Exchange rates: 
  Swiss francs, franken, or franchi (SwF) per US$1 - 1.4715 (January
  1994), 1.4776 (1993), 1.4062 (1992), 1.4340 (1991), 1.3892 (1990),
  1.6359 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Liechtenstein, Communications

Railroads: 
  18.5 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, electrified; owned, operated, and
  included in statistics of Austrian Federal Railways
Highways: 
total: 
  322.93 km 
paved: 
  322.93 km 
Airports: 
  none
Telecommunications: 
  limited, but sufficient automatic telephone system; 25,400 telephones;
  linked to Swiss networks by cable and radio relay for international
  telephone, radio, and TV services

@Liechtenstein, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is responsibility of Switzerland


@Lithuania, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between Sweden and Russia
Map references: 
  Asia, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  65,200 sq km 
land area: 
  65,200 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than West Virginia
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,273 km, Belarus 502 km, Latvia 453 km, Poland 91 km, Russia
  (Kaliningrad) 227 km 
Coastline: 
  108 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  dispute with Russia (Kaliningrad Oblast) over the position of the
  Nemunas (Nemen) River border presently located on the Lithuanian bank
  and not in midriver as by international standards
Climate: 
  maritime; wet, moderate winters and summers
Terrain: 
  lowland, many scattered small lakes, fertile soil
Natural resources: 
  peat 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  49.1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  22.2% 
forest and woodland: 
  16.3% 
other: 
  12.4% 
Irrigated land: 
  430 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  contamination of soil and groundwater with petroleum products and
  chemicals at military bases
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change
Population: 
  3,848,389 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.74% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.71 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.95 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.62 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  16.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.24 years 
male: 
  66.53 years 
female: 
  76.19 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.01 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Lithuanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Lithuanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Lithuanian 80.1%, Russian 8.6%, Polish 7.7%, Byelorussian 1.5%, other
  2.1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic, Lutheran, other 
Languages: 
  Lithuanian (official), Polish, Russian 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1989)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  1.836 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 42%, agriculture and forestry 18%, other 40%
  (1990)

@Lithuania, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Lithuania 
conventional short form: 
  Lithuania 
local long form: 
  Lietuvos Respublika 
local short form: 
  Lietuva 
former: 
  Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  LH
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Vilnius 
Administrative divisions: 
  44 regions (rajonai, singular - rajonas) and 11 municipalities*:
  Akmenes Rajonas, Alytaus Rajonas, Alytus*, Anyksciu Rajonas,
  Birsionas*, Birzu Rajonas, Druskininkai*, Ignalinos Rajonas, Jonavos
  Rajonas, Joniskio Rajonas, Jurbarko Rajonas, Kaisiadoriu Rajonas,
  Marijampoles Rajonas, Kaunas*, Kauno Rajonas, Kedainiu Rajonas, Kelmes
  Rajonas, Klaipeda*, Klaipedos Rajonas, Kretingos Ragonas, Kupiskio
  Rajonas, Lazdiju Rajonas, Marijampole*, Mazeikiu Ragonas, Moletu
  Rajonas, Neringa* Pakruojo Rajonas, Palanga*, Panevezio Rajonas,
  Panevezys*, Pasvalio Rajonas, Plunges Rajonas, Prienu Rajonas,
  Radviliskio Rajonas, Raseiniu Rajonas, Rokiskio Rajonas, Sakiu
  Rajonas, Salcininky Rajonas, Siauliai*, Siauliu Rajonas, Silales
  Rajonas, Siltues Rajonas, Sirvinty Rajonas, Skuodo Rajonas, Svencioniu
  Rajonas, Taurages Rajonas, Telsiu Rajonas, Traky Rajonas, Ukmerges
  Rajonas, Utenos Rajonas, Varenos Rajonas, Vilkaviskio Rajonas,
  Vilniaus Rajonas, Vilnius*, Zarasu Rajonas
Independence: 
  6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 16 February (1918) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 25 October 1992
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; no judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Algirdas Mykolas BRAZAUSKAS (since 25 November 1992; elected
  acting president by Parliament 25 November 1992 and elected by direct
  vote 15 February 1993); election last held 14 February 1993 (next to
  be held NA 1997); results - Algirdas BRAZAUSKAS was elected; note - on
  25 November 1992 BRAZAUSKAS was elected chairman of Parliament and, as
  such, acting president of the Republic; he was confirmed in office by
  direct balloting 15 February 1993
head of government: 
  Premier Adolfas SLEZEVICIUS (since 10 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on the nomination of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Seimas (parliament): 
  elections last held 26 October and 25 November 1992 (next to be held
  NA); results - LDDP 51%; seats - (141 total) LDDP 73, Conservative
  Party 30, LKDP 17, LTS 8, Farmers' Union 4, LLS 4, Center Union 2,
  others 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Court of Appeals 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Christian Democratic Party (LKDP), Povilas KATILIUS, chairman;
  Democratic Labor Party of Lithuania (LDDP), Adolfas SLEZEVICIUS,
  chairman; Lithuanian Nationalist Union (LTS), Rimantas SMETONA,
  chairman; Lithuanian Social Democratic Party (LSDP), Aloyzas SAKALAS,
  chairman; Farmers' Union, Jonas CIULEVICIUS, chairman; Center Union,
  Romualdas OZOLAS, chairman; Conservative Party, Vytautas LANDSBERGIS,
  chairman; Lithuanian Polish Union (LLS), Rytardas MACIKIANEC, chairman
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Homeland Union; Lithuanian Future Forum; Farmers Union
Member of: 
  BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ILO, IMF,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU,
  LORCS, NACC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Alfonsas EIDINTAS 
chancery: 
  2622 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-5860, 2639 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-0466 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Darryl N. JOHNSON 
embassy: 
  Akmenu 6, Vilnius 232600 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09723 
telephone: 
  370-2-223-031 
FAX: 
  370-2-222-779 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top), green, and red

@Lithuania, Economy

Overview: 
  Since independence in September 1991, Lithuania has made steady
  progress in developing a market economy. Over 40% of state property
  has been privatized and trade is diversifying with a gradual shift
  away from the former Soviet Union to Western markets. Nevertheless,
  the process has been painful with industrial output in 1993 less than
  half the 1991 level. Inflation, while lower than in most ex-Soviet
  states, has exceeded rates in the other Baltic states. Full monetary
  stability and economic recovery are likely to be impeded by periodic
  government backtracking on key elements of its reform and
  stabilization program as it seeks to ease the economic pain of
  restructuring. Recovery will build on Lithuanian's strategic location
  with its ice-free port at Klaipeda and its rail and highway hub in
  Vilnius connecting it with Eastern Europe, Belarus, Russia, and
  Ukraine, and on its agriculture potential, highly skilled labor force,
  and diversified industrial sector. Lacking important natural
  resources, it will remain dependent on imports of fuels and raw
  materials.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $12.4 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Lithuanian statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -10% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,240 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  188% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  1.8% (July 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $258.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $270.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  electronics 18%, petroleum products 5%, food 10%, chemicals 6% (1989)
partners: 
  Russia 40%, Ukraine 16%, other FSU countries 32%, West 12%
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  oil 24%, machinery 14%, chemicals 8%, grain NA% (1989)
partners: 
  Russia 62%, Belarus 18%, other FSU countries 10%, West 10%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -52% (1992)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,925,000 kW
production: 
  25 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,600 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  employs 42% of the labor force; accounts for 23% of GOP shares in the
  total production of the former USSR are: metal-cutting machine tools
  6.6%; electric motors 4.6%; television sets 6.2%; refrigerators and
  freezers 5.4%; other branches: petroleum refining, shipbuilding (small
  ships), furniture making, textiles, food processing, fertilizers,
  agricultural machinery, optical equipment, electronic components,
  computers, and amber
Agriculture: 
  employs around 18% of labor force; accounts for 25% of GDP; sugar,
  grain, potatoes, sugar beets, vegetables, meat, milk, dairy products,
  eggs, fish; most developed are the livestock and dairy branches, which
  depend on imported grain; net exporter of meat, milk, and eggs
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for illicit drugs from Central and Southwest Asia
  and Latin America to Western Europe; limited producer of illicit
  opium; mostly for domestic consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (1992), $10 million; Western (non-US)
  countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-86), $NA million;
  Communist countries (1971-86), $NA million
Currency: 
  introduced the convertible litas in June 1993
Exchange rates: 
  litai per US$1 - 4 (fixed rate 1 May 1994); 3.9 (late January 1994)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Lithuania, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,000 km (1,524-mm gauge); 120 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  44,200 km 
paved: 
  35,500 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 8,700 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  600 km perennially navigable
Pipelines: 
  crude oil, 105 km; natural gas 760 km (1992)
Ports: 
  coastal - Klaipeda; inland - Kaunas
Merchant marine: 
  44 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 276,265 GRT/323,505 DWT, cargo
  29, combination bulk 11, railcar carrier 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  96 
usable: 
  18 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  11 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  Lithuania ranks among the most modern of the former Soviet republics
  in respect to its telecommunications system; telephone subscriber
  circuits 900,000; subscriber density 240 per 1,000 persons; land lines
  or microwave to former USSR republics; international connections no
  longer depend on the Moscow gateway switch, but are established by
  satellite through Oslo from Vilnius and through Copenhagen from
  Kaunas; 2 satellite earth stations - 1 EUTELSAT and 1 INTELSAT; an
  NMT-450 analog cellular network operates in Vilnius and other cities
  and is linked internationally through Copenhagen by EUTELSAT;
  international electronic mail is available; broadcast stations - 13
  AM, 26 FM, 1 SW, 1 LW, 3 TV

@Lithuania, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force, Security Forces (internal and border
  troops), National Guard (Skat) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 941,273; fit for military service 744,867; reach
  military age (18) annually 27,375 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $NA, 5.5% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Luxembourg, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, between Belgium and Germany
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,586 sq km 
land area: 
  2,586 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Rhode Island
Land boundaries: 
  total 359 km, Belgium 148 km, France 73 km, Germany 138 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  modified continental with mild winters, cool summers
Terrain: 
  mostly gently rolling uplands with broad, shallow valleys; uplands to
  slightly mountainous in the north; steep slope down to Moselle
  floodplain in the southeast
Natural resources: 
  iron ore (no longer exploited) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  24% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  21% 
other: 
  34% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber; signed,
  but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental
  Modification, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked

@Luxembourg, People

Population: 
  401,900 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.8% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.81 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.47 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  4.7 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.69 years 
male: 
  73.01 years 
female: 
  80.52 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.64 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Luxembourger(s) 
adjective: 
  Luxembourg 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Celtic base (with French and German blend), Portuguese, Italian, and
  European (guest and worker residents)
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant and Jewish 3% 
Languages: 
  Luxembourgisch, German, French, English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  177,300 (one-third of labor force is foreign workers, mostly from
  Portugal, Italy, France, Belgium, and Germany)
by occupation: 
  services 65%, industry 31.6%, agriculture 3.4% (1988)

@Luxembourg, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Grand Duchy of Luxembourg 
conventional short form: 
  Luxembourg 
local long form: 
  Grand-Duche de Luxembourg 
local short form: 
  Luxembourg 
Digraph: 
  LU
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Luxembourg 
Administrative divisions: 
  3 districts; Diekirch, Grevenmacher, Luxembourg
Independence: 
  1839 
National holiday: 
  National Day, 23 June (1921) (public celebration of the Grand Duke's
  birthday) 
Constitution: 
  17 October 1868, occasional revisions
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Grand Duke JEAN (since 12 November 1964); Heir Apparent Prince HENRI
  (son of Grand Duke Jean, born 16 April 1955) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Jacques SANTER (since 21 July 1984); Vice Prime
  Minister Jacques F. POOS (since 21 July 1984) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the sovereign
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Chamber of Deputies (Chambre des Deputes): 
  elections last held on 18 June 1989 (next to be held by June 1994);
  results - CSV 31.7%, LSAP 27.2%, DP 16.2%, Greens 8.4%, PAC 7.3%, KPL
  5.1%, other 4.1%; seats - (60 total) CSV 22, LSAP 18, DP 11, Greens 4,
  PAC 4, KPL 1
note: 
  the Council of State (Conseil d'Etat) is an advisory body whose views
  are considered by the Chamber of Deputies
Judicial branch: 
  Superior Court of Justice (Cour Superieure de Justice) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Christian Social Party (CSV), Jacques SANTER; Socialist Workers Party
  (LSAP), Jacques POOS; Liberal (DP), Colette FLESCH; Communist (KPL),
  Andre HOFFMANN; Green Alternative (GAP), Jean HUSS
Other political or pressure groups: 
  group of steel companies representing iron and steel industry;
  Centrale Paysanne representing agricultural producers; Christian and
  Socialist labor unions; Federation of Industrialists; Artisans and
  Shopkeepers Federation
Member of: 
  ACCT, Australia Group, Benelux, CCC, CE, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECE,
  EIB, FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU, LORCS, MTCR, NACC,
  NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNPROFOR, UPU,
  WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Alphonse BERNS 
chancery: 
  2200 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-4171 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-8270 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward M. ROWELL 
embassy: 
  22 Boulevard Emmanuel-Servais, 2535 Luxembourg City 
mailing address: 
  PSC 11, Luxembourg City; APO AE 09132-5380 
telephone: 
  [352] 460123 
FAX: 
  [352] 461401 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and light blue;
  similar to the flag of the Netherlands, which uses a darker blue and
  is shorter; design was based on the flag of France

@Luxembourg, Economy

Overview: 
  The stable, prosperous economy features moderate growth, low
  inflation, and negligible unemployment. Agriculture is based on small
  but highly productive family-owned farms. The industrial sector, until
  recently dominated by steel, has become increasingly more diversified,
  particularly toward high-technology firms. During the past decade,
  growth in the financial sector has more than compensated for the
  decline in steel. Services, especially banking, account for a growing
  proportion of the economy. Luxembourg participates in an economic
  union with Belgium on trade and most financial matters, is also
  closely connected economically to the Netherlands, and as a member of
  the 12-member European Union enjoys the advantages of the open
  European market.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $8.7 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $22,600 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.6% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.1% (March 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $3.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $6.4 billion (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  finished steel products, chemicals, rubber products, glass, aluminum,
  other industrial products
partners: 
  EC 76%, US 5%
Imports: 
  $8.3 billion (c.i.f., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  minerals, metals, foodstuffs, quality consumer goods
partners: 
  Belgium 37%, FRG 31%, France 12%, US 2%
External debt: 
  $131.6 million (1989 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -0.5% (1990); accounts for 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,238,750 kW
production: 
  1.375 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,450 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  banking, iron and steel, food processing, chemicals, metal products,
  engineering, tires, glass, aluminum
Agriculture: 
  accounts for less than 3% of GDP (including forestry); principal
  products - barley, oats, potatoes, wheat, fruits, wine grapes; cattle
  raising widespread
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Luxembourg franc (LuxF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Luxembourg francs (LuxF) per US$1 - 36.242 (January 1994), 34.597
  (1993), 32.150 (1992), 34.148 (1991), 33.418 (1990), 39.404 (1989);
  note - the Luxembourg franc is at par with the Belgian franc, which
  circulates freely in Luxembourg
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Luxembourg, Communications

Railroads: 
  Luxembourg National Railways (CFL) operates 272 km 1,435-mm standard
  gauge; 178 km double track; 197 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  5,108 km 
paved: 
  4,995 km (including 80 km of limited access divided highway)
unpaved: 
  gravel 57 km; earth 56 km 
Inland waterways: 
  37 km; Moselle River
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 48 km 
Ports: 
  Mertert (river port)
Merchant marine: 
  50 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,477,998 GRT/2,424,994 DWT,
  bulk 8, cargo 2, chemical tanker 4, combination bulk 6, combination
  ore/oil 2, container 4, liquefied gas 9, oil tanker 5, passenger 2,
  refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4 
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed, completely automated and efficient system, mainly
  buried cables; 230,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, 3 FM, 3
  TV; 3 channels leased on TAT-6 coaxial submarine cable; 1
  direct-broadcast satellite earth station; nationwide mobile phone
  system

@Luxembourg, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, National Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 103,872; fit for military service 86,026; reach
  military age (19) annually 2,235 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $100 million, 1.2% of GDP (1992)


@Macau

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas territory of Portugal) 

@Macau, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, 27 km west-southwest of Hong Kong on the southeast coast
  of China bordering the South China Sea
Map references: 
  Asia, Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  16 sq km 
land area: 
  16 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 0.34 km, China 0.34 km 
Coastline: 
  40 km 
Maritime claims: 
  not specified
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical; marine with cool winters, warm summers
Terrain: 
  generally flat
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Ozone Layer Protection
Note: 
  essentially urban; one causeway and one bridge connect the two islands
  to the peninsula on mainland

@Macau, People

Population: 
  484,557 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.35% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.78 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.12 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  79.75 years 
male: 
  77.33 years 
female: 
  82.3 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.46 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Macanese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Macau 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chinese 95%, Portuguese 3%, other 2% 
Religions: 
  Buddhist 45%, Roman Catholic 7%, Protestant 1%, none 45.8%, other 1.2%
  (1981)
Languages: 
  Portuguese (official), Cantonese is the language of commerce
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1981)
total population: 
  90% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  86% 
Labor force: 
  180,000 (1986)
by occupation: 
  NA

@Macau, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Macau 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ilha de Macau 
Digraph: 
  MC
Type: 
  overseas territory of Portugal scheduled to revert to China in 1999
Capital: 
  Macau 
Administrative divisions: 
  2 districts (concelhos, singular - concelho); Ilhas, Macau
Independence: 
  none (territory of Portugal; Portugal signed an agreement with China
  on 13 April 1987 to return Macau to China on 20 December 1999; in the
  joint declaration, China promises to respect Macau's existing social
  and economic systems and lifestyle for 50 year after transition)
National holiday: 
  Day of Portugal, 10 June (1580) 
Constitution: 
  17 February 1976, Organic Law of Macau; basic law drafted primarily by
  Beijing awaiting final approval
Legal system: 
  Portuguese civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President (of Portugal) Mario Alberto SOARES (since 9 March 1986) 
head of government: 
  Governor Gen. Vasco Joachim Rocha VIEIRA (since 20 March 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Consultative Council; consists of five members appointed by the
  governor, two nominated by the governor, five members elected for a
  four-year term (2 represent administrative bodies, 1 represents moral,
  cultural, and welfare interests, and 2 economic interests), and three
  statuatory members
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly: 
  elections last held on 10 March 1991; results - percent of vote by
  party NA; seats - (23 total; 8 elected by universal suffrage, 8 by
  indirect suffrage, and 7 appointed by the governor) number of seats by
  party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Association to Defend the Interests of Macau; Macau Democratic Center;
  Group to Study the Development of Macau; Macau Independent Group
Other political or pressure groups: 
  wealthy Macanese and Chinese representing local interests, wealthy
  pro-Communist merchants representing China's interests; in January
  1967 the Macau Government acceded to Chinese demands that gave China
  veto power over administration
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), GATT, IMO (associate), INTERPOL (subbureau), WTO
  (associate) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (Chinese territory under Portuguese administration)
US diplomatic representation: 
  the US has no offices in Macau, and US interests are monitored by the
  US Consulate General in Hong Kong
Flag: 
  the flag of Portugal is used

@Macau, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based largely on tourism (including gambling) and
  textile and fireworks manufacturing. Efforts to diversify have spawned
  other small industries - toys, artificial flowers, and electronics.
  The tourist sector has accounted for roughly 25% of GDP, and the
  clothing industry has provided about two-thirds of export earnings;
  the gambling industry represented well over 40% of GDP in 1992. Macau
  depends on China for most of its food, fresh water, and energy
  imports. Japan and Hong Kong are the main suppliers of raw materials
  and capital goods.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $3.5 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  12% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $7,300 (1992)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7.7% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  2% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $305 million 
expenditures: 
  $298 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1989 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.8 billion (1992 est.)
commodities: 
  textiles, clothing, toys
partners: 
  US 35%, Hong Kong 12.5%, Germany 12%, China 9.9%, France 8% (1992
  est.)
Imports: 
  $2 billion (1992 est.)
commodities: 
  raw materials, foodstuffs, capital goods
partners: 
  Hong Kong 33%, China 20%, Japan 18% (1992 est.)
External debt: 
  $91 million (1985)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  258,000 kW
production: 
  855 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,806 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  clothing, textiles, toys, plastic products, furniture, tourism
Agriculture: 
  rice, vegetables; food shortages - rice, vegetables, meat; depends
  mostly on imports for food requirements
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 pataca (P) = 100 avos
Exchange rates: 
  patacas (P) per US$1 - 8.034 (1991-93), 8.024 (1990), 8.030 (1989);
  note - linked to the Hong Kong dollar at the rate of 1.03 patacas per
  Hong Kong dollar
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Macau, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  42 km 
paved: 
  42 km 
Ports: 
  Macau
Airports: 
  none usable, 1 under construction; 1 seaplane station
Telecommunications: 
  fairly modern communication facilities maintained for domestic and
  international services; 52,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 4 AM,
  3 FM, no TV (TV programs received from Hong Kong); 115,000 radio
  receivers (est.); international high-frequency radio communication
  facility; access to international communications carriers provided via
  Hong Kong and China; 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Macau, Defense Forces

Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 139,499; fit for military service 77,887 
Note: 
  defense is responsibility of Portugal


@Madagascar, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the western Indian Ocean, 430 km east of
  Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  587,040 sq km 
land area: 
  581,540 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Arizona
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  4,828 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims Bassas da India, Europa Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova
  Island, and Tromelin Island (all administered by France)
Climate: 
  tropical along coast, temperate inland, arid in south
Terrain: 
  narrow coastal plain, high plateau and mountains in center
Natural resources: 
  graphite, chromite, coal, bauxite, salt, quartz, tar sands,
  semiprecious stones, mica, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  58% 
forest and woodland: 
  26% 
other: 
  11% 
Irrigated land: 
  9,000 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion results from deforestation and overgrazing;
  desertification; surface water contaminated with untreated sewage and
  other organic wastes; several species of flora and fauna unique to the
  island are endangered
natural hazards: 
  subject to periodic cyclones
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test
  Ban; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of
  the Sea
Note: 
  world's fourth-largest island; strategic location along Mozambique
  Channel

@Madagascar, People

Population: 
  13,427,758 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.19% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.22 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  13.35 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  89 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  53.98 years 
male: 
  52.06 years 
female: 
  55.96 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.68 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Malagasy (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Malagasy 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Malayo-Indonesian (Merina and related Betsileo), Cotiers (mixed
  African, Malayo-Indonesian, and Arab ancestry - Betsimisaraka,
  Tsimihety, Antaisaka, Sakalava), French, Indian, Creole, Comoran 
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 52%, Christian 41%, Muslim 7% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Malagasy (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  80% 
male: 
  88% 
female: 
  73% 
Labor force: 
  4.9 million (90% nonsalaried family workers engaged in subsistence
  agriculture; 175,000 wage earners)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 26%, domestic service 17%, industry 15%, commerce 14%,
  construction 11%, services 9%, transportation 6%, other 2%
note: 
  51% of population of working age (1985)

@Madagascar, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Madagascar 
conventional short form: 
  Madagascar 
local long form: 
  Republique de Madagascar 
local short form: 
  Madagascar 
former: 
  Malagasy Republic 
Digraph: 
  MA
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Antananarivo 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 provinces - Antananarivo, Antsiranana, Fianarantsoa, Mahajanga,
  Toamasina, Toliary
Independence: 
  26 June 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 26 June (1960) 
Constitution: 
  19 August 1992 by national referendum
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and traditional Malagasy law; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Albert ZAFY (since 9 March 1993); election last held on 10
  February 1993 (next to be held 1998); results - Albert ZAFY (UNDD),
  67%; Didier RATSIRAKA (AREMA), 33%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Francisque RAVONY (since 9 August 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  (Senat) two-thirds of upper house seats are to be filled by an
  electoral college made up of representatives of territorial
  collectivities; the remaining third is to be filled by presidential
  appointment, following nomination by economic, social, and cultural
  groups; the selection of senators was scheduled for March 1994
National Assembly: 
  (Assemblee Nationale) elections last held on 16 June 1993 (next to be
  held June 1997); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (138
  total) CFV coalition 76, PMDM/MFM 16, CSCD 11, Famima 10, RPSD 7,
  various pro-Ratsiraka groups 10, others 8
note: 
  the National Assembly has suspended its operations during 1992 and
  early 1993 in preparation for new legislative elections. In its place,
  an interim High Authority of State and a Social and Economic Recovery
  Council have been established
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme), High Constitutional Court (Haute Cour
  Constitutionnelle) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Committee of Living Forces (CFV), an alliance of National Union for
  Development and Democracy (UNDD), Support Group for Democracy and
  Development in Madagascar (CSDDM), Action and Reflection Group for the
  Development of Madagascar (Grad), Congress Party for Madagascar
  Independence - Renewal (AKFM-Fanavaozana), and some 12 other
  anti-Ratsiraka oppositon parties, trade unions, and religious groups;
  leader Dr. Albert ZAFY; Militant Party for the Development of
  Madagascar (PMDM/MFM; formerly the Movement for Proletarian Power),
  Manandafy RAKOTONIRINA; Confederation of Civil Societies for
  Development (CSCD), Guy Willy RAZANAMASY; Association of United
  Malagasys (Famima); Rally for Social Democracy (RPSD), Pierre
  TSIRANANA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Council of Christian Churches (FFKM); Federalist Movement
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Pierrot Jocelyn RAJAONARIVELO 
chancery: 
  2374 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-5525 or 5526 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dennis P. BARRETT 
embassy: 
  14-16 Rue Rainitovo, Antsahavola, Antananarivo 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 620, Antananarivo 
telephone: 
  [261] (2) 212-57, 200-89, 207-18 
FAX: 
  261-234-539 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green with a vertical
  white band of the same width on hoist side

@Madagascar, Economy

Overview: 
  Madagascar is one of the poorest countries in the world. Agriculture,
  including fishing and forestry, is the mainstay of the economy,
  accounting for over 30% of GDP and contributing more than 70% of total
  export earnings. Industry is largely confined to the processing of
  agricultural products and textile manufacturing; in 1991 it accounted
  for only 13% of GDP. In 1986 the government introduced a five-year
  development plan that stressed self-sufficiency in food (mainly rice)
  by 1990, increased production for exports, and reduced energy imports.
  Subsequently, growth in output has been held back because of
  protracted antigovernment strikes and demonstrations for political
  reform.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $10.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  20% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $250 million 
expenditures: 
  $265 million, including capital expenditures of $180 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $312 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  coffee 45%, vanilla 20%, cloves 11%, shellfish, sugar, petroleum
  products
partners: 
  France, Japan, Italy, Germany, US
Imports: 
  $350 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  intermediate manufactures 30%, capital goods 28%, petroleum 15%,
  consumer goods 14%, food 13%
partners: 
  France, Germany, UK, other EC, US
External debt: 
  $4.4 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5.2% (1990 est.); accounts for 13% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  125,000 kW
production: 
  450 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  35 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  agricultural processing (meat canneries, soap factories, breweries,
  tanneries, sugar refining plants), light consumer goods industries
  (textiles, glassware), cement, automobile assembly plant, paper,
  petroleum
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 31% of GDP; cash crops - coffee, vanilla, sugarcane,
  cloves, cocoa; food crops - rice, cassava, beans, bananas, peanuts;
  cattle raising widespread; almost self-sufficient in rice
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis (cultivated and wild varieties) used
  mostly for domestic consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $136 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $3.125 billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $491 million 
Currency: 
  1 Malagasy franc (FMG) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Malagasy francs (FMG) per US$1 - 1,965.8 (January 1994), 1,864.0
  (1992), 1,835.4 (1991), 1,454.6 (December 1990), 1,603.4 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Madagascar, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,020 km 1.000-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  40,000 km 
paved: 
  4,694 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 811 km; other earth 34,495 km
  (est.)
Inland waterways: 
  of local importance only; isolated streams and small portions of Canal
  des Pangalanes
Ports: 
  Toamasina, Antsiranana, Mahajanga, Toliara
Merchant marine: 
  10 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 23,620 GRT/33,173 DWT, cargo 5,
  chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas 1, oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  140 
usable: 
  105 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  30 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  37 
Telecommunications: 
  above average system includes open-wire lines, coaxial cables, radio
  relay, and troposcatter links; submarine cable to Bahrain; satellite
  earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and broadcast stations - 17
  AM, 3 FM, 1 (36 repeaters) TV

@Madagascar, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Popular Armed Forces (including Intervention Forces, Development
  Forces, Aeronaval Forces - including Navy and Air Force), Gendarmerie,
  Presidential Security Regiment 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,924,829; fit for military service 1,739,830; reach
  military age (20) annually 124,652 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $37 million, 2.2% of GDP (1991 est.)


@Malawi, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, between Mozambique and Zambia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  118,480 sq km 
land area: 
  94,080 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Pennsylvania
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,881 km, Mozambique 1,569 km, Tanzania 475 km, Zambia 837 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  dispute with Tanzania over the boundary in Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi)
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy season (November to May); dry season (May to November)
Terrain: 
  narrow elongated plateau with rolling plains, rounded hills, some
  mountains
Natural resources: 
  limestone, unexploited deposits of uranium, coal, and bauxite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  25% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  50% 
other: 
  5% 
Irrigated land: 
  200 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; land degradation; water pollution from agricultural
  runoff, sewage, industrial wastes; siltation of spawning grounds
  endangers fish population
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection; signed, but not ratified - Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked

@Malawi, People

Population: 
  9,732,409 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -1.09% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  50.42 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  23.19 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -38.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  141.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  39.73 years 
male: 
  38.93 years 
female: 
  40.55 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  7.43 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Malawian(s) 
adjective: 
  Malawian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chewa, Nyanja, Tumbuko, Yao, Lomwe, Sena, Tonga, Ngoni, Ngonde, Asian,
  European 
Religions: 
  Protestant 55%, Roman Catholic 20%, Muslim 20%, traditional indigenous
  beliefs 
Languages: 
  English (official), Chichewa (official), other languages important
  regionally
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1966)
total population: 
  22% 
male: 
  34% 
female: 
  12% 
Labor force: 
  428,000 wage earners
by occupation: 
  agriculture 43%, manufacturing 16%, personal services 15%, commerce
  9%, construction 7%, miscellaneous services 4%, other permanently
  employed 6% (1986)

@Malawi, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Malawi 
conventional short form: 
  Malawi 
former: 
  Nyasaland 
Digraph: 
  MI
Type: 
  multiparty democracy following a referendum on 14 June 1993; formerly
  a one-party republic
Capital: 
  Lilongwe 
Administrative divisions: 
  24 districts; Blantyre, Chikwawa, Chiradzulu, Chitipa, Dedza, Dowa,
  Karonga, Kasungu, Lilongwe, Machinga (Kasupe), Mangochi, Mchinji,
  Mulanje, Mwanza, Mzimba, Ntcheu, Nkhata Bay, Nkhotakota, Nsanje,
  Ntchisi, Rumphi, Salima, Thyolo, Zomba
Independence: 
  6 July 1964 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 6 July (1964) 
Constitution: 
  6 July 1966; republished as amended January 1974
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and customary law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in the Supreme Court of Appeal; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May 1994), leader of the United
  Democratic Front 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; named by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections last held 17 May 1994 (next to be held NA); seats - (177
  total) UDF 84, AFORD 33, MCP 55, others 5
Judicial branch: 
  High Court, Supreme Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
ruling party: 
  United Democratic Front (UDF), Bakili MULUZI
opposition groups: 
  Malawi Congress Party (MCP), Gwanda CHAKUAMBA Phiri, secretary general
  (top party position); Alliance for Democracy (Aford), Chakufwa
  CHIHANA; Socialist League of Malawi (Lesoma), Kapote MWAKUSULA,
  secretary general; Malawi Democratic Union (MDU), Harry BWANAUSI;
  Congress for the Second Republic (CSR), Kanyama CHIUME; Malawi
  Socialist Labor Party (MSLP), Stanford SAMBANEMANJA
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Robert B. MBAYA 
chancery: 
  2408 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 797-1007 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Michael T. F. PISTOR 
embassy: 
  address NA, in new capital city development area in Lilongwe 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 30016, Lilongwe 3, Malawi 
telephone: 
  [265] 783-166 
FAX: 
  [265] 780-471 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red, and green with a
  radiant, rising, red sun centered in the black band; similar to the
  flag of Afghanistan, which is longer and has the national coat of arms
  superimposed on the hoist side of the black and red bands

@Malawi, Economy

Overview: 
  Landlocked Malawi ranks among the world's least developed countries.
  The economy is predominately agricultural, with about 90% of the
  population living in rural areas. Agriculture accounts for 40% of GDP
  and 90% of export revenues. After two years of weak performance,
  economic growth improved significantly in 1988-91 as a result of good
  weather and a broadly based economic adjustment effort by the
  government. Drought cut overall output sharply in 1992. The economy
  depends on substantial inflows of economic assistance from the IMF,
  the World Bank, and individual donor nations.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent $6 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -8% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  21% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $416 million 
expenditures: 
  $498 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $413 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  tobacco, tea, sugar, coffee, peanuts, wood products
partners: 
  US, UK, Zambia, South Africa, Germany
Imports: 
  $737 million (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  food, petroleum products, semimanufactures, consumer goods,
  transportation equipment
partners: 
  South Africa, Japan, US, UK, Zimbabwe
External debt: 
  $1.8 billion (December 1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.5% (1992 est.); accounts for about 15% of GDP (1992
  est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  190,000 kW
production: 
  620 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  65 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  agricultural processing (tea, tobacco, sugar), sawmilling, cement,
  consumer goods
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 40% of GDP; cash crops - tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, tea,
  and corn; subsistence crops - potatoes, cassava, sorghum, pulses;
  livestock - cattle, goats
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $215 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2.15
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 Malawian kwacha (MK) = 100 tambala
Exchange rates: 
  Malawian kwacha (MK) per US$1 - 4.4598 (November 1993), 3.6033 (1992),
  2.8033 (1991), 2.7289 (1990), 2.7595 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Malawi, Communications

Railroads: 
  789 km 1.067-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  13,135 km 
paved: 
  2,364 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 251 km; earth, improved earth
  10,520 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi); Shire River, 144 km
Ports: 
  Chipoka, Monkey Bay, Nkhata Bay, and Nkotakota - all on Lake Nyasa
  (Lake Malawi)
Airports: 
total: 
  47 
usable: 
  41 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  10 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system of open-wire lines, radio relay links, and radio
  communications stations; 42,250 telephones; broadcast stations - 10
  AM, 17 FM, no TV; satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
Note: 
  a majority of exports would normally go through Mozambique on the
  Beira, Nacala, and Limgogo railroads, but now most go through South
  Africa because of insurgent activity and damage to rail lines

@Malawi, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (including Air Wing and Naval Detachment), Police (including
  paramilitary Mobile Force Unit), 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,046,413; fit for military service 1,043,674 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $22 million, 1.6% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Malaysia, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea, between Vietnam and
  Indonesia
Map references: 
  Asia, Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  329,750 sq km 
land area: 
  328,550 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,669 km, Brunei 381 km, Indonesia 1,782 km, Thailand 506 km 
Coastline: 
  4,675 km (Peninsular Malaysia 2,068 km, East Malaysia 2,607 km)
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation; specified boundary in the
  South China Sea
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with China,
  Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; State of Sabah
  claimed by the Philippines; Brunei may wish to purchase the Malaysian
  salient that divides Brunei into two parts; two islands in dispute
  with Singapore; two islands in dispute with Indonesia
Climate: 
  tropical; annual southwest (April to October) and northeast (October
  to February) monsoons
Terrain: 
  coastal plains rising to hills and mountains
Natural resources: 
  tin, petroleum, timber, copper, iron ore, natural gas, bauxite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  10% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  63% 
other: 
  24% 
Irrigated land: 
  3,420 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air and water pollution; deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to flooding
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical
  Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law
  of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location along Strait of Malacca and southern South China
  Sea

@Malaysia, People

Population: 
  19,283,157 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.28% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.45 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.67 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  25.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.15 years 
male: 
  66.26 years 
female: 
  72.18 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.51 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Malaysian(s) 
adjective: 
  Malaysian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Malay and other indigenous 59%, Chinese 32%, Indian 9% 
Religions: 
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  Muslim (Malays), Buddhist (Chinese), Hindu (Indians)
Sabah: 
  Muslim 38%, Christian 17%, other 45% 
Sarawak: 
  tribal religion 35%, Buddhist and Confucianist 24%, Muslim 20%,
  Christian 16%, other 5% 
Languages: 
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  Malay (official), English, Chinese dialects, Tamil 
Sabah: 
  English, Malay, numerous tribal dialects, Chinese (Mandarin and Hakka
  dialects predominate)
Sarawak: 
  English, Malay, Mandarin, numerous tribal languages 
  *** No data for this item ***
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  78% 
male: 
  86% 
female: 
  70% 
Labor force: 
  7.258 million (1991 est.)

@Malaysia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Malaysia 
former: 
  Malayan Union 
Digraph: 
  MY
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
note: 
  Federation of Malaysia formed 9 July 1963; nominally headed by the
  paramount ruler (king) and a bicameral Parliament; Peninsular
  Malaysian states - hereditary rulers in all but Melaka, where
  governors are appointed by
  Malaysian Pulau Pinang Government; powers of state governments are
  limited by federal Constitution; Sabah - self-governing state, holds
  20 seats in House of Representatives, with foreign affairs, defense,
  internal security, and other powers delegated to federal government;
  Sarawak - self-governing state, holds 27 seats in House of
  Representatives, with foreign affairs, defense, internal security, and
  other powers delegated to federal government
Capital: 
  Kuala Lumpur 
Administrative divisions: 
  13 states (negeri-negeri, singular - negeri) and 2 federal
  territories* (wilayah-wilayah persekutuan, singular - wilayah
  persekutuan); Johor, Kedah, Kelantan, Labuan*, Melaka, Negeri
  Sembilan, Pahang, Perak, Perlis, Pulau Pinang, Sabah, Sarawak,
  Selangor, Terengganu, Wilayah Persekutuan*
Independence: 
  31 August 1957 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 31 August (1957) 
Constitution: 
  31 August 1957, amended 16 September 1963
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; judicial review of legislative acts in
  the Supreme Court at request of supreme head of the federation; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Paramount Ruler JA'AFAR ibni Abdul Rahman (since 26 April 1994);
  Deputy Paramount Ruler SALAHUDDIN ibni Hisammuddin Alam Shah (since 26
  April 1994) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Dr. MAHATHIR bin Mohamad (since 16 July 1981); Deputy
  Prime Minister ANWAR bin Ibrahim (since 1 December 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the Paramount Ruler from members of parliament
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Parlimen)
Senate (Dewan Negara): 
  consists of a 58-member body, 32 appointed by the paramount ruler and
  16 elected by the state legislatures
House of Representatives (Dewan Rakyat): 
  elections last held 21 October 1990 (next to be held by August 1995);
  results - National Front 52%, other 48%; seats - (180 total) National
  Front 127, DAP 20, PAS 7, independents 4, other 22; note - within the
  National Front, UMNO got 71 seats and MCA 18 seats
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  National Front, a confederation of 13 political parties dominated by
  United Malays National Organization Baru (UMNO Baru), MAHATHIR bin
  Mohamad; Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), LING Liong Sik; Gerakan
  Rakyat Malaysia, LIM Keng Yaik; Malaysian Indian Congress (MIC), S.
  Samy VELLU
Sabah: 
  National Front, Tan Sri SAKARAN, Sabah Chief Minister; United Sabah
  National Organizaton (USNO), leader NA
Sarawak: 
  coalition Sarawak National Front composed of the Party Pesaka
  Bumiputra Bersatu (PBB), Datuk Patinggi Amar Haji Abdul TAIB Mahmud;
  Sarawak United People's Party (SUPP), Datuk Amar James WONG Soon Kai;
  Sarawak National Party (SNAP), Datuk Amar James WONG; Parti Bansa
  Dayak Sarawak (PBDS), Datuk Leo MOGGIE; major opposition parties are
  Democratic Action Party (DAP), LIM Kit Siang and Pan-Malaysian Islamic
  Party (PAS), Fadzil NOOR
Member of: 
  APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-15, G-77, GATT, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OIC, UN,
  UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMOZ, UNOSOM, UNTAC, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Abdul MAJID bin Mohamed 
chancery: 
  2401 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 328-2700 
FAX: 
  (202) 483-7661 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John S. WOLF 
embassy: 
  376 Jalan Tun Razak, 50400 Kuala Lumpur 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box No. 10035, 50700 Kuala Lumpur; APO AP 96535-5000 
telephone: 
  [60] (3) 248-9011 
FAX: 
  [60] (3) 242-2207 
Flag: 
  fourteen equal horizontal stripes of red (top) alternating with white
  (bottom); there is a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side corner
  bearing a yellow crescent and a yellow fourteen-pointed star; the
  crescent and the star are traditional symbols of Islam; the design was
  based on the flag of the US

@Malaysia, Economy

Overview: 
  The Malaysian economy, a mixture of private enterprise and a soundly
  managed public sector, has posted a remarkable record of 8%-9% average
  growth in 1987-93. This growth has resulted in a substantial reduction
  in poverty and a marked rise in real wages. Despite sluggish growth in
  the major world economies in 1992-93, demand for Malaysian goods
  remained strong, and foreign investors continued to commit large sums
  in the economy. The government is aware of the inflationary potential
  of this rapid development and is closely monitoring fiscal and
  monetary policies.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $141 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  8% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $7,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.6% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  3% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $19.6 billion 
expenditures: 
  $18 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.4 billion (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $46.8 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  electronic equipment, petroleum and petroleum products, palm oil, wood
  and wood products, rubber, textiles
partners: 
  Singapore 23%, US 15%, Japan 13%, UK 4%, Germany 4%, Thailand 4%
  (1991)
Imports: 
  $40.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, food, petroleum products
partners: 
  Japan 26%, Singapore 21%, US 16%, Taiwan 6%, Germany 4%, UK 3%,
  Australia 3% (1991)
External debt: 
  $18.4 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 13% (1992); accounts for 43% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  8,000,000 kW
production: 
  30 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,610 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  rubber and oil palm processing and manufacturing, light manufacturing
  industry, electronics, tin mining and smelting, logging and processing
  timber
Sabah: 
  logging, petroleum production
Sarawak: 
  agriculture processing, petroleum production and refining, logging
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 17% of GDP
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  natural rubber, palm oil, rice
Sabah: 
  mainly subsistence, but also rubber, timber, coconut, rice
Sarawak: 
  rubber, timber, pepper; deficit of rice in all areas
Illicit drugs: 
  transit point for Golden Triangle heroin going to the US, Western
  Europe, and the Third World despite severe penalties for drug
  trafficking
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-84), $170 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $4.7
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $42 million 
Currency: 
  1 ringgit (M$) = 100 sen
Exchange rates: 
  ringgits (M$) per US$1 - 2.7123 (January 1994), 2.5741 (1993), 2.5474
  (1992), 2.7501 (1991), 1.7048 (1990), 2.7088 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Malaysia, Communications

Railroads: 
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  1,665 km 1.04-meter gauge; 13 km double track, government owned
Sabah: 
  136 km 1.000-meter gauge
Sarawak: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  29,026 km (Peninsular Malaysia 23,600 km, Sabah 3,782 km, Sarawak
  1,644 km)
paved: 
  NA (Peninsular Malaysia 19,352 km mostly bituminous treated)
unpaved: 
  NA (Peninsular Malaysia 4,248 km)
Inland waterways: 
Peninsular Malaysia: 
  3,209 km
Sabah: 
  1,569 km
Sarawak: 
  2,518 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,307 km; natural gas 379 km 
Ports: 
  Tanjong Kidurong, Kota Kinabalu, Kuching, Pasir Gudang, Penang, Port
  Kelang, Sandakan, Tawau
Merchant marine: 
  183 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,935,210 GRT/2,913,808 DWT,
  bulk 29, cargo 69, chemical tanker 6, container 26, liquefied gas 6,
  livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 39, passenger-cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 2, vehicle carrier 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  113 
usable: 
  104 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  33 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  18 
Telecommunications: 
  good intercity service provided on Peninsular Malaysia mainly by
  microwave radio relay; adequate intercity microwave radio relay
  network between Sabah and Sarawak via Brunei; international service
  good; good coverage by radio and television broadcasts; 994,860
  telephones (1984); broadcast stations - 28 AM, 3 FM, 33 TV; submarine
  cables extend to India and Sarawak; SEACOM submarine cable links to
  Hong Kong and Singapore; satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean
  INTELSAT, 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT, and 2 domestic

@Malaysia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Malaysian Army, Royal Malaysian Navy, Royal Malaysian Air Force, Royal
  Malaysian Police Force, Marine Police, Sarawak Border Scouts 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,942,387; fit for military service 3,001,972; reach
  military age (21) annually 182,850 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.2 billion, 3% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Maldives, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, in the Indian Ocean off the southwest coast of India
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  300 sq km 
land area: 
  300 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  644 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  35-310 nm as defined by geographic coordinates; segment of zone
  coincides with maritime boundary with India
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; dry, northeast monsoon (November to March);
  rainy, southwest monsoon (June to August)
Terrain: 
  flat with elevations only as high as 2.5 meters
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  84% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  depletion of freshwater aquifers threatens water supplies
natural hazards: 
  low level of islands makes them very sensitive to sea level rise
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer
  Protection; signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  1,200 coral islands grouped into 19 atolls; archipelago of strategic
  location astride and along major sea lanes in Indian Ocean

@Maldives, People

Population: 
  252,077 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.61% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.59 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.45 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  53.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  64.67 years 
male: 
  63.24 years 
female: 
  66.17 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.26 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Maldivian(s) 
adjective: 
  Maldivian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Sinhalese, Dravidian, Arab, African 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 
Languages: 
  Divehi (dialect of Sinhala; script derived from Arabic), English
  spoken by most government officials
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1985)
total population: 
  92% 
male: 
  92% 
female: 
  92% 
Labor force: 
  66,000 (est.)
by occupation: 
  fishing industry 25%

@Maldives, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Maldives 
conventional short form: 
  Maldives 
Digraph: 
  MV
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Male 
Administrative divisions: 
  19 districts (atolls); Aliff, Baa, Daalu, Faafu, Gaafu Aliff, Gaafu
  Daalu, Haa Aliff, Haa Daalu, Kaafu, Laamu, Laviyani, Meemu, Naviyani,
  Noonu, Raa, Seenu, Shaviyani, Thaa, Waavu
Independence: 
  26 July 1965 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 26 July (1965) 
Constitution: 
  4 June 1968
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law with admixtures of English common law primarily
  in commercial matters; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11 November 1978); election last
  held 1 October 1993 (next to be held NA); results - President Maumoon
  Abdul GAYOOM was reelected with 92.76% of the vote
cabinet: 
  Ministry of Atolls; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Citizens' Council (Majlis): 
  elections last held on 7 December 1989 (next to be held 7 December
  1994); results - percent of vote NA; seats - (48 total, 40 elected)
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  no organized political parties; country governed by the Didi clan for
  the past eight centuries
Member of: 
  AsDB, C, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, NAM, OIC,
  SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Maldives has no embassy in the US, but does have a UN mission in New
  York; Permanent Representative to the UN Ahmed ZAKI
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  the US Ambassador to Sri Lanka is accredited to Maldives and makes
  periodic visits there 
consular agency: 
  Midhath Hilmy, Male 
telephone: 
  2581 
Flag: 
  red with a large green rectangle in the center bearing a vertical
  white crescent; the closed side of the crescent is on the hoist side
  of the flag

@Maldives, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on fishing, tourism, and shipping. Agriculture is
  limited to the production of a few subsistence crops that provide only
  10% of food requirements. Fishing is the largest industry, employing
  25% of the work force and accounting for over 60% of exports; it is
  also an important source of government revenue. During the 1980s
  tourism became one of the most important and highest growth sectors of
  the economy. In 1988 industry accounted for about 5% of GDP. Real GDP
  is officially estimated to have increased by about 10% annually during
  the period 1974-90.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $140 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $620 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  15% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NEGL%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $95 million (excluding foreign transfers)
expenditures: 
  $143 million, including capital expenditures of $71 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $56.3 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  fish, clothing
partners: 
  US, UK, Sri Lanka
Imports: 
  $173.6 million (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  consumer goods, intermediate and capital goods, petroleum products
partners: 
  Singapore, Germany, Sri Lanka, India
External debt: 
  $148 million (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 24% (1990); accounts for 6% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,000 kW
production: 
  11 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  50 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  fishing and fish processing, tourism, shipping, boat building, some
  coconut processing, garments, woven mats, coir (rope), handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  accounts for almost 25% of GDP (including fishing); fishing more
  important than farming; limited production of coconuts, corn, sweet
  potatoes; most staple foods must be imported; fish catch of 67,000
  tons (1990 est.)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-88), $28 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $125
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $14 million 
Currency: 
  1 rufiyaa (Rf) = 100 laari
Exchange rates: 
  rufiyaa (Rf) per US$1 - 11.105 (January 1994), 10.957 (1993), 10.569
  (1992), 10.253 (1991), 9.509 (1990), 9.0408 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Maldives, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA (Male has 9.6 km of coral highways within the city)
Ports: 
  Male, Gan
Merchant marine: 
  14 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 38,848 GRT/58,496 DWT, cargo 12,
  container 1, oil tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  minimal domestic and international facilities; 2,804 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV; 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@Maldives, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Security Service (paramilitary police force)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 55,369; fit for military service 30,919 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Mali, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, between Mauritania and Niger
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.24 million sq km 
land area: 
  1.22 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 7,243 km, Algeria 1,376 km, Burkina 1,000 km, Guinea 858 km,
  Cote d'Ivoire 532 km, Mauritania 2,237 km, Niger 821 km, Senegal 419
  km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  the disputed international boundary between Burkina and Mali was
  submitted to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in October 1983
  and the ICJ issued its final ruling in December 1986, which both sides
  agreed to accept; Burkina and Mali are proceeding with boundary
  demarcation, including the tripoint with Niger
Climate: 
  subtropical to arid; hot and dry February to June; rainy, humid, and
  mild June to November; cool and dry November to February
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to rolling northern plains covered by sand; savanna in
  south, rugged hills in northeast
Natural resources: 
  gold, phosphates, kaolin, salt, limestone, uranium, bauxite, iron ore,
  manganese, tin, and copper deposits are known but not exploited 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  25% 
forest and woodland: 
  7% 
other: 
  66% 
Irrigated land: 
  50 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; inadequate supplies of
  safe drinking water; poaching
natural hazards: 
  hot, dust-laden harmattan haze common during dry seasons; recurring
  droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  landlocked

@Mali, People

Population: 
  9,112,950 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.78% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  51.79 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  20.36 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  106.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  45.91 years 
male: 
  44.29 years 
female: 
  47.57 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  7.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Malian(s) 
adjective: 
  Malian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Mande 50% (Bambara, Malinke, Sarakole), Peul 17%, Voltaic 12%, Songhai
  6%, Tuareg and Moor 10%, other 5% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 90%, indigenous beliefs 9%, Christian 1% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Bambara 80%, numerous African languages 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  17% 
male: 
  26% 
female: 
  9% 
Labor force: 
  2.666 million (1986 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 80%, services 19%, industry and commerce 1% (1981)
note: 
  50% of population of working age (1985)

@Mali, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Mali 
conventional short form: 
  Mali 
local long form: 
  Republique de Mali 
local short form: 
  Mali 
former: 
  French Sudan 
Digraph: 
  ML
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Bamako 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 regions (regions, singular - region); Gao, Kayes, Kidal, Koulikoro,
  Mopti, Segou, Sikasso, Tombouctou
Independence: 
  22 September 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Proclamation of the Republic, 22 September (1960) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution adopted in constitutional referendum in 12 January
  1992
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and customary law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in Constitutional Court (which was formally
  established on 9 March 1994); has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Alpha Oumar KONARE (since 8 June 1992); election last held
  in April 1992 (next to be held NA 1997); Alpha KONARE was elected in
  runoff race against Montaga TALL
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Ibrahima Boubacar KEITA (since March 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections last held on 8 March 1992 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (total 116) Adema 76, CNID 9,
  US/RAD 8, Popular Movement for the Development of the Republic of West
  Africa 6, RDP 4, UDD 4, RDT 3, UFDP 3, PDP 2, UMDD 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Association for Democracy (Adema), Alpha Oumar KONARE; National
  Congress for Democratic Initiative (CNID), Mountaga TALL; Sudanese
  Union/African Democratic Rally (US/RDA), Mamadou Madeira KEITA;
  Popular Movement for the Development of the Republic of West Africa;
  Rally for Democracy and Progress (RDP), Almamy SYLLA; Union for
  Democracy and Development (UDD), Moussa Balla COULIBALY; Rally for
  Democracy and Labor (RDT); Union of Democratic Forces for Progress
  (UFDP), Dembo DIALLO; Party for Democracy and Progress (PDP), Idrissa
  TRAORE; Malian Union for Democracy and Development (UMDD)
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Siragatou Ibrahim CISSE 
chancery: 
  2130 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-2249 or 939-8950 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William H. DAMERON III 
embassy: 
  Rue Rochester NY and Rue Mohamed V., Bamako 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 34, Bamako 
telephone: 
  [223] 225470 
FAX: 
  [223] 228059 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), yellow, and red;
  uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

@Mali, Economy

Overview: 
  Mali is among the poorest countries in the world, with about 70% of
  its land area desert or semidesert. Economic activity is largely
  confined to the riverine area irrigated by the Niger. About 10% of the
  population live as nomads and some 80% of the labor force is engaged
  in agriculture and fishing. Industrial activity is concentrated on
  processing farm commodities. In consultation with international
  lending agencies, the government has adopted a structural adjustment
  program for 1992-95, aiming at GDP annual growth of 4.6%, inflation of
  no more than 2.5% on average, and a substantial reduction in the
  external current account deficit.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - 5.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -6.1% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $650 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $376 million 
expenditures: 
  $697 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $330 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  cotton, livestock, gold
partners: 
  mostly franc zone and Western Europe
Imports: 
  $682 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, construction materials,
  petroleum, textiles
partners: 
  mostly franc zone and Western Europe
External debt: 
  $2.6 billion (1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1.4% (1992 est.); accounts for 13.0% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  260,000 kW
production: 
  750 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  90 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  small local consumer goods and processing, construction, phosphate,
  gold, fishing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 50% of GDP; most production based on small subsistence
  farms; cotton and livestock products account for over 70% of exports;
  other crops - millet, rice, corn, vegetables, peanuts; livestock -
  cattle, sheep, goats
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $349 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $3.02
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $92 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $190 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  beginning 12 January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per
  French franc from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Mali, Communications

Railroads: 
  642 km 1.000-meter gauge; linked to Senegal's rail system through
  Kayes
Highways: 
total: 
  15,700 km 
paved: 
  1,670 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 3,670 km; unimproved earth 10,360 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,815 km navigable
Airports: 
total: 
  33 
usable: 
  27 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  8 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  11 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic system poor but improving; provides only minimal service with
  radio relay, wire, and radio communications stations; expansion of
  radio relay in progress; 11,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM,
  2 FM, 2 TV; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT

@Mali, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, Gendarmerie, Republican Guard, National Police
  (Surete Nationale)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,803,301; fit for military service 1,027,780 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $41 million, 2% of GDP (1989)


@Malta, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Europe, in the central Mediterranean Sea, 93 km south of
  Sicily (Italy), 290 km north of Libya
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  320 sq km 
land area: 
  320 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  140 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  25 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  Mediterranean with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry summers
Terrain: 
  mostly low, rocky, flat to dissected plains; many coastal cliffs
Natural resources: 
  limestone, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  38% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  59% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  fresh water very scarce; increasing reliance on desalination
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity
Note: 
  the country comprises an archipelago, with only the 3 largest islands
  (Malta, Gozo, and Comino) being inhabited; numerous bays provide good
  harbors

@Malta, People

Population: 
  366,767 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.79% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.56 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.45 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.77 years 
male: 
  74.53 years 
female: 
  79.18 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.94 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Maltese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Maltese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab, Sicilian, Norman, Spanish, Italian, English 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 98% 
Languages: 
  Maltese (official), English (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1985)
total population: 
  84% 
male: 
  86% 
female: 
  82% 
Labor force: 
  127,200 
by occupation: 
  government (excluding job corps) 37%, services 26%, manufacturing 22%,
  training programs 9%, construction 4%, agriculture 2% (1990)

@Malta, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Malta 
conventional short form: 
  Malta 
Digraph: 
  MT
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Valletta 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (administration directly from Valletta)
Independence: 
  21 September 1964 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 21 September (1964) 
Constitution: 
  1964 constitution substantially amended on 13 December 1974
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and Roman civil law; has accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Ugo MIFSUD BONNICI (since 4 April 1994) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Dr. Edward (Eddie) FENECH ADAMI (since 12 May 1987);
  Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Guido DE MARCO (since 14 May 1987) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president on advice of the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held on 22 February 1992 (next to be held by February
  1997); results - NP 51.8%, MLP 46.5%; seats - (usually 65 total) MLP
  36, NP 29; note - additional seats are given to the party with the
  largest popular vote to ensure a legislative majority; current total
  69 (MLP 33, NP 36 after adjustment)
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Nationalist Party (NP), Edward FENECH ADAMI; Malta Labor Party (MLP),
  Alfred SANT
Member of: 
  C, CCC, CE, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Albert BORG OLIVIER DE PUGET 
chancery: 
  2017 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-3611 or 3612 
FAX: 
  (202) 387-5470 
consulate(s): 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires William A. MOFFITT (new ambassador
  nominated, but not confirmed)
embassy: 
  2nd Floor, Development House, Saint Anne Street, Floriana, Valletta 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 535, Valletta 
telephone: 
  [356] 235960 
FAX: 
  [356] 243229 
Flag: 
  two equal vertical bands of white (hoist side) and red; in the upper
  hoist-side corner is a representation of the George Cross, edged in
  red

@Malta, Economy

Overview: 
  Significant resources are limestone, a favorable geographic location,
  and a productive labor force. Malta produces only about 20% of its
  food needs, has limited freshwater supplies, and has no domestic
  energy sources. Consequently, the economy is highly dependent on
  foreign trade and services. Manufacturing and tourism are the largest
  contributors to the economy. Manufacturing accounts for about 27% of
  GDP, with the electronics and textile industries major contributors
  and the state-owned Malta drydocks which employs about 4,300 people.
  In 1992, about 1,000,000 tourists visited the island. Per capita GDP
  at $6,600 places Malta in the middle-income range of the world's
  nations.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $2.4 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.5% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $6,600 (1992)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.64% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  4% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $182 million (FY94
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, clothing and footware, printed
  matter
partners: 
  Italy 30%, Germany 22%, UK 11%
Imports: 
  $1.93 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  food, petroleum, machinery and semimanufactured goods
partners: 
  Italy 30%, UK 16%, Germany 13%, US 4%
External debt: 
  $118 million (1990)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5.4% (1992); accounts for 27% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  328,000 kW
production: 
  1.11 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,000 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, electronics, ship repair yard, construction, food
  manufacturing, textiles, footwear, clothing, beverages, tobacco
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 3% of GDP and 2% of the work force (1992); overall, 20%
  self-sufficient; main products - potatoes, cauliflower, grapes, wheat,
  barley, tomatoes, citrus, cut flowers, green peppers, hogs, poultry,
  eggs; generally adequate supplies of vegetables, poultry, milk, pork
  products; seasonal or periodic shortages in grain, animal fodder,
  fruits, other basic foodstuffs
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for hashish from North Africa to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-81), $172 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $336
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $76 million; Communist
  countries (1970-88), $48 million 
Currency: 
  1 Maltese lira (LM) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Maltese liri (LM) per US$1 - 0.3951 (January 1994), 0.3821 (1993),
  0.3178 (1992), 0.3226 (1991), 0.3172 (1990), 0.3483 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Malta, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,291 km 
paved: 
  asphalt 1,179 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 77 km; earth 35 km 
Ports: 
  Valletta, Marsaxlokk
Merchant marine: 
  897 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 13,959,195 GRT/24,038,587 DWT,
  barge carrier 3, bulk 259, cargo 296, chemical tanker 25, combination
  bulk 28, combination ore/oil 18, container 26, liquefied gas 2,
  multifunction large load carrier 3, oil tanker 157, passenger 6,
  passenger-cargo 3, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 17,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 20, short-sea passenger 19, specialized tanker
  5, vehicle carrier 9 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry; China owns 11 ships, Russia owns 42
  ships, Cuba owns 10, Vietnam owns 6, Croatia owns 63, Romania owns 4
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  automatic system satisfies normal requirements; 153,000 telephones;
  excellent service by broadcast stations - 8 AM, 4 FM, and 2 TV;
  submarine cable and microwave radio relay between islands;
  international service by 1 submarine cable and 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Malta, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Armed Forces, Maltese Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 98,241; fit for military service 78,071 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $21.9 million, 1.3% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Man, Isle of

Header

Affiliation: 
  (British crown dependency) 

@Man, Isle of, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, in the Irish Sea, between Ireland and Great Britain
Map references: 
  Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  588 sq km 
land area: 
  588 sq km 
comparative area: 
  nearly 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  113 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  cool summers and mild winters; humid; overcast about half the time
Terrain: 
  hills in north and south bisected by central valley
Natural resources: 
  lead, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA% (extensive arable land and forests)
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  one small islet, the Calf of Man, lies to the southwest, and is a bird
  sanctuary

@Man, Isle of, People

Population: 
  72,017 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.04% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.69 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.58 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  9.25 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.25 years 
male: 
  73.51 years 
female: 
  79.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.8 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Manxman, Manxwoman 
adjective: 
  Manx 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Manx (Norse-Celtic descent), Briton 
Religions: 
  Anglican, Roman Catholic, Methodist, Baptist, Presbyterian, Society of
  Friends 
Languages: 
  English, Manx Gaelic 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  25,864 (1981)
by occupation: 
  NA 

@Man, Isle of, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Isle of Man 
Digraph: 
  IM
Type: 
  British crown dependency 
Capital: 
  Douglas 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (British crown dependency)
Independence: 
  none (British crown dependency)
National holiday: 
  Tynwald Day, 5 July 
Constitution: 
  1961, Isle of Man Constitution Act
Legal system: 
  English law and local statute
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Lord of Mann Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented
  by Lieutenant Governor Air Marshal Sir Laurence JONES (since NA 1990) 
head of government: 
  President of the Legislative Council Sir Charles KERRUISH (since NA
  1990) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Tynwald
Legislative Council: 
  consists of a 10-member body composed of the Lord Bishop of Sodor and
  Man, a nonvoting attorney general, and 8 others named by the House of
  Keys
House of Keys: 
  elections last held in 1991 (next to be held NA 1996); results -
  percent of vote NA; seats - (24 total) independents 24
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Tynwald 
Political parties and leaders: 
  there is no party system and members sit as independents
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (British crown dependency)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (British crown dependency)
Flag: 
  red with the Three Legs of Man emblem (Trinacria), in the center; the
  three legs are joined at the thigh and bent at the knee; in order to
  have the toes pointing clockwise on both sides of the flag, a
  two-sided emblem is used

@Man, Isle of, Economy

Overview: 
  Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism are key sectors of the
  economy. The government's policy of offering incentives to
  high-technology companies and financial institutions to locate on the
  island has paid off in expanding employment opportunities in
  high-income industries. As a result, agriculture and fishing, once the
  mainstays of the economy, have declined in their shares of GNP.
  Banking now contributes about 45% to GNP. Trade is mostly with the UK.
  The Isle of Man enjoys free access to European Union markets.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $490 million (1988)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $7,500 (1988)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  1% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $130.4 million 
expenditures: 
  $114.4 million, including capital expenditures of $18.1 million (1985
  est.)
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  tweeds, herring, processed shellfish, meat
partners: 
  UK
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  timber, fertilizers, fish
partners: 
  UK
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  61,000 kW
production: 
  190 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,965 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  an important offshore financial center; financial services, light
  manufacturing, tourism
Agriculture: 
  cereals and vegetables; cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 Manx pound (#M) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Manx pounds (#M) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6658 (1993),
  0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989); the Manx
  pound is at par with the British pound
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Man, Isle of, Communications

Railroads: 
  60 km; 36 km electric track, 24 km steam track
Highways: 
total: 
  640 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Douglas, Ramsey, Peel
Merchant marine: 
  67 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,359,951 GRT/2,316,628 DWT,
  bulk 11, cargo 10, chemical tanker 5, container 5, liquefied gas 7,
  oil tanker 17, roll-on/roll-off cargo 9, vehicle carrier 3 
note: 
  a captive register of the United Kingdom, although not all ships on
  the register are British owned
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  24,435 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, 4 FM, 4 TV

@Man, Isle of, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Marshall Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, about two-thirds of
  the way between Hawaii and Papua New Guinea
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  181.3 sq km 
land area: 
  181.3 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Washington, DC
note: 
  includes the atolls of Bikini, Eniwetak, and Kwajalein
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  370.4 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims US territory of Wake Island
Climate: 
  wet season May to November; hot and humid; islands border typhoon belt
Terrain: 
  low coral limestone and sand islands
Natural resources: 
  phosphate deposits, marine products, deep seabed minerals 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  60% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  40% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  inadequate supplies of safe drinking water
natural hazards: 
  occasionally subject to typhoons
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
Note: 
  two archipelagic island chains of 30 atolls and 1,152 islands; Bikini
  and Eniwetak are former US nuclear test sites; Kwajalein, the famous
  World War II battleground, is now used as a US missile test range

@Marshall Islands, People

Population: 
  54,031 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.86% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  46.31 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.68 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  49.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  63.13 years 
male: 
  61.6 years 
female: 
  64.74 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.94 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Marshallese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Marshallese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Micronesian 
Religions: 
  Christian (mostly Protestant)
Languages: 
  English (universally spoken and is the official language), two major
  Marshallese dialects from the Malayo-Polynesian family, Japanese 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  88% 
Labor force: 
  4,800 (1986)
by occupation: 
  NA


@Marshall Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of the Marshall Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Marshall Islands 
former: 
  Marshall Islands District (Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands) 
Digraph: 
  RM
Type: 
  constitutional government in free association with the US; the Compact
  of Free Association entered into force 21 October 1986
Capital: 
  Majuro 
Administrative divisions: 
  none
Independence: 
  21 October 1986 (from the US-administered UN trusteeship)
National holiday: 
  Proclamation of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, 1 May (1979) 
Constitution: 
  1 May 1979
Legal system: 
  based on adapted Trust Territory laws, acts of the legislature,
  municipal, common, and customary laws
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Amata KABUA (since 1979); election last held 6 January 1992
  (next to be held NA; results - President Amata KABUA was reelected)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; president selects from the parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Nitijela): 
  elections last held 18 November 1991 (next to be held November 1995);
  results - percent of vote NA; seats - (33 total)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  no formal parties; President KABUA is chief political (and
  traditional) leader
Member of: 
  AsDB, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user),
  INTERPOL, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Wilfred I. KENDALL 
chancery: 
  2433 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-5414 
FAX: 
  (202) 232-3236 
consulate(s) general: 
  Honolulu and Los Angeles 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador David C. FIELDS 
embassy: 
  NA address, Majuro 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1379, Majuro, Republic of the Marshall Islands 96960-1379 
telephone: 
  (692) 625-4011 
FAX: 
  (692) 625-4012 
Flag: 
  blue with two stripes radiating from the lower hoist-side corner -
  orange (top) and white; there is a white star with four large rays and
  20 small rays on the hoist side above the two stripes

@Marshall Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture and tourism are the mainstays of the economy. Agricultural
  production is concentrated on small farms, and the most important
  commercial crops are coconuts, tomatoes, melons, and breadfruit. A few
  cattle ranches supply the domestic meat market. Small-scale industry
  is limited to handicrafts, fish processing, and copra. The tourist
  industry is the primary source of foreign exchange and employs about
  10% of the labor force. The islands have few natural resources, and
  imports far exceed exports. In 1987 the US Government provided grants
  of $40 million out of the Marshallese budget of $55 million.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $63 million (1989 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1992 est)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1992 est)
Unemployment rate: 
  16% (1991 est)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $55 million 
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1987 est.)
Exports: 
  $3.9 million (f.o.b., 1992 est)
commodities: 
  coconut oil, fish, live animals, trichus shells
partners: 
  US, Japan, Australia
Imports: 
  $62.9 million (c.i.f., 1992 est)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, beverages and tobacco, fuels
partners: 
  US, Japan, Australia
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  42,000 kW
production: 
  80 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,840 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  copra, fish, tourism; craft items from shell, wood, and pearls;
  offshore banking (embryonic)
Agriculture: 
  coconuts, cacao, taro, breadfruit, fruits, pigs, chickens
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, the US is to
  provide approximately $40 million in aid annually
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Marshall Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
note: 
  paved roads on major islands (Majuro, Kwajalein), otherwise stone-,
  coral-, or laterite-surfaced roads and tracks
Ports: 
  Majuro
Merchant marine: 
  40 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,255,348 GRT/4,351,997 DWT,
  bulk carrier 23, cargo 2, combination ore/oil 1, container 1, oil
  tanker 13 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  16 
usable: 
  16 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  8 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone network - 570 lines (Majuro) and 186 (Ebeye); telex
  services; islands interconnected by shortwave radio (used mostly for
  government purposes); broadcast stations - 1 AM, 2 FM, 1 TV, 1
  shortwave; 2 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth stations; US Government
  satellite communications system on Kwajalein

@Marshall Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Martinique

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas department of France) 

@Martinique, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the Caribbean Sea, off the coast of Venezuela
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,100 sq km 
land area: 
  1,060 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than six times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  290 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by trade winds; rainy season (June to October)
Terrain: 
  mountainous with indented coastline; dormant volcano
Natural resources: 
  coastal scenery and beaches, cultivable land 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  8% 
meadows and pastures: 
  30% 
forest and woodland: 
  26% 
other: 
  26% 
Irrigated land: 
  60 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes, flooding, and volcanic activity that result in
  an average of one major natural disaster every five years
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Martinique, People

Population: 
  392,362 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.2% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  17.96 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.95 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  10.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.01 years 
male: 
  74.88 years 
female: 
  81.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.92 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Martiniquais (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Martiniquais 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African and African-Caucasian-Indian mixture 90%, Caucasian 5%, East
  Indian, Lebanese, Chinese less than 5%
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95%, Hindu and pagan African 5% 
Languages: 
  French, Creole patois 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1982)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  92% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  100,000 
by occupation: 
  service industry 31.7%, construction and public works 29.4%,
  agriculture 13.1%, industry 7.3%, fisheries 2.2%, other 16.3%

@Martinique, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Department of Martinique 
conventional short form: 
  Martinique 
local long form: 
  Departement de la Martinique 
local short form: 
  Martinique 
Digraph: 
  MB
Type: 
  overseas department of France 
Capital: 
  Fort-de-France 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Independence: 
  none (overseas department of France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French legal system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  Prefect Michel MORIN (since NA); President of the General Council
  Claude LISE (since 22 March 1992); President of the Regional Council
  Emile CAPGRAS (since 22 March 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral General Council and a unicameral Regional Assembly
General Council: 
  elections last held in 25 September and 8 October 1988 (next to be
  held by NA); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (44 total)
  number of seats by party NA; note - a leftist coalition obtained a
  one-seat margin
Regional Assembly: 
  elections last held on 22 March 1992 (next to be held by March 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (41 total) RPR-UDF 16,
  MIM 9, PPM 9, PCM 5, independents 2
French Senate: 
  elections last held 24 September 1989 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (2 total) UDF 1, PPM 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held on NA June 1993 (next to be held June 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (4 total) RPR 3, FSM 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Rally for the Republic (RPR), Stephen BAGOE; Union for a Martinique of
  Progress (UMP); Martinique Progressive Party (PPM), Aime CESAIRE and
  Camille DARSIERES; Socialist Federation of Martinique (FSM), Jean
  CRUSOL; Martinique Communist Party (PCM); Martinique Patriots (PM);
  Union for French Democracy (UDF), Jean MARAN; Martinique Independence
  Movement (MIM), Alfred MARIE-JEANNE
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Proletarian Action Group (GAP); Alhed Marie-Jeanne Socialist
  Revolution Group (GRS); Caribbean Revolutionary Alliance (ARC);
  Central Union for Martinique Workers (CSTM), Marc PULVAR; Frantz Fanon
  Circle; League of Workers and Peasants; Parti Martiniquais Socialiste
  (PMS)
Member of: 
  FZ, WCL, WFTU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas department of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  the post closed in August 1993 (overseas department of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@Martinique, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on sugarcane, bananas, tourism, and light
  industry. Agriculture accounts for about 10% of GDP and the small
  industrial sector for 10%. Sugar production has declined, with most of
  the sugarcane now used for the production of rum. Banana exports are
  increasing, going mostly to France. The bulk of meat, vegetable, and
  grain requirements must be imported, contributing to a chronic trade
  deficit that requires large annual transfers of aid from France.
  Tourism has become more important than agricultural exports as a
  source of foreign exchange. The majority of the work force is employed
  in the service sector and in administration. Banana workers launched
  protests late in 1992 because of falling banana prices and fears of
  greater competition in the European market from other producers.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $3.3 billion (1991)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $9,500 (1991)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.9% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  32.1% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $268 million 
expenditures: 
  $268 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1989 est.)
Exports: 
  $201.5 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  refined petroleum products, bananas, rum, pineapples
partners: 
  France 57.1%, Guadeloupe 31.5%, French Guiana 6.2%
Imports: 
  $1.5 billion (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  petroleum products, crude oil, foodstuffs, construction materials,
  vehicles, clothing and other consumer goods
partners: 
  France 62.2%, UK, Italy, Germany, Japan, US
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  113,100 kW
production: 
  588 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,580 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  construction, rum, cement, oil refining, sugar, tourism
Agriculture: 
  including fishing and forestry, accounts for about 10% of GDP;
  principal crops - pineapples, avocados, bananas, flowers, vegetables,
  sugarcane for rum; dependent on imported food, particularly meat and
  vegetables
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $10.1 billion 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9305 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Martinique, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,680 km 
paved: 
  1,300 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 380 km 
Ports: 
  Fort-de-France
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic facilities are adequate; 68,900 telephones; interisland
  microwave radio relay links to Guadeloupe, Dominica, and Saint Lucia;
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, 6 FM, 10 TV; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  earth stations

@Martinique, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  French Forces, Gendarmerie 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Mauritania, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, along the North Atlantic Ocean, between Western
  Sahara and Senegal
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,030,700 sq km 
land area: 
  1,030,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than three times the size of New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,074 km, Algeria 463 km, Mali 2,237 km, Senegal 813 km, Western
  Sahara 1,561 km 
Coastline: 
  754 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  boundary with Senegal
Climate: 
  desert; constantly hot, dry, dusty
Terrain: 
  mostly barren, flat plains of the Sahara; some central hills
Natural resources: 
  iron ore, gypsum, fish, copper, phosphate 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  38% 
forest and woodland: 
  5% 
other: 
  56% 
Irrigated land: 
  120 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  overgrazing, deforestation, and soil erosion aggravated by drought are
  contributing to desertification; water scarcity away from the Senegal
  which is the only perennial river
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind blows primarily in March and
  April
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  most of the population concentrated along the Senegal River in the
  southern part of the country

@Mauritania, People

Population: 
  2,192,777 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.16% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  47.65 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  16.09 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  85.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  48.06 years 
male: 
  45.23 years 
female: 
  51.01 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.99 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mauritanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Mauritanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mixed Maur/black 40%, Maur 30%, black 30% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 100% 
Languages: 
  Hasaniya Arabic (official), Pular, Soninke, Wolof (official)
Literacy: 
  age 10 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  34% 
male: 
  47% 
female: 
  21% 
Labor force: 
  465,000 (1981 est.); 45,000 wage earners (1980)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 47%, services 29%, industry and commerce 14%, government
  10%
note: 
  53% of population of working age (1985)

@Mauritania, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Islamic Republic of Mauritania 
conventional short form: 
  Mauritania 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Islamiyah al Muritaniyah 
local short form: 
  Muritaniyah 
Digraph: 
  MR
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Nouakchott 
Administrative divisions: 
  12 regions (regions, singular - region); Adrar, Assaba, Brakna,
  Dakhlet Nouadhibou, Gorgol, Guidimaka, Hodh ech Chargui, Hodh el
  Gharbi, Inchiri, Tagant, Tiris Zemmour, Trarza
note: 
  there may be a new capital district of Nouakchott
Independence: 
  28 November 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 28 November (1960) 
Constitution: 
  12 July 1991
Legal system: 
  three-tier system: Islamic (Shari'a) courts, special courts, state
  security courts (in the process of being eliminated)
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed TAYA (since 12 December 1984);
  election last held January 1992 (next to be held January 1998);
  results - President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid 'Ahmed TAYA elected
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral legislature
Senate (Majlis al-Shuyukh): 
  elections last held 15 April 1994 (one-third of the seats up for
  re-election in 1996)
National Assembly (Majlis al-Watani): 
  elections last held 6 and 13 March 1992 (next to be held March 1997)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  legalized by constitution passed 12 July 1991, however, politics
  continue to be tribally based; emerging parties include Democratic and
  Social Republican Party (PRDS), led by President Col. Maaouya Ould
  Sid'Ahmed TAYA; Union of Democratic Forces - New Era (UFD/NE), headed
  by Ahmed Ould DADDAH; Assembly for Democracy and Unity (RDU), Ahmed
  Ould SIDI BABA; Popular Social and Democratic Union (UPSD), Mohamed
  Mahmoud Ould MAH; Mauritanian Party for Renewal (PMR), Hameida
  BOUCHRAYA; National Avant-Garde Party (PAN), Khattry Ould JIDDOU;
  Mauritanian Party of the Democratic Center (PCDM), Bamba Ould SIDI
  BADI
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Mauritanian Workers Union (UTM)
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACCT (associate), ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CAEU, CCC,
  CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mohamed Fall Ould AININA 
chancery: 
  2129 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 232-5700 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Gordon S. BROWN 
embassy: 
  address NA, Nouakchott 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 222, Nouakchott 
telephone: 
  [222] (2) 526-60 or 526-63 
FAX: 
  [222] (2) 515-92 
Flag: 
  green with a yellow five-pointed star above a yellow, horizontal
  crescent; the closed side of the crescent is down; the crescent, star,
  and color green are traditional symbols of Islam

@Mauritania, Economy

Overview: 
  A majority of the population still depends on agriculture and
  livestock for a livelihood, even though most of the nomads and many
  subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by recurrent droughts
  in the 1970s and 1980s. Mauritania has extensive deposits of iron ore,
  which account for almost 50% of total exports. The decline in world
  demand for this ore, however, has led to cutbacks in production. The
  nation's coastal waters are among the richest fishing areas in the
  world, but overexploitation by foreigners threatens this key source of
  revenue. The country's first deepwater port opened near Nouakchott in
  1986. In recent years, drought and economic mismanagement have
  resulted in a substantial buildup of foreign debt. The government has
  begun the second stage of an economic reform program in consultation
  with the World Bank, the IMF, and major donor countries.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.2 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,050 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11.5% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  20% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $280 million 
expenditures: 
  $346 million, including capital expenditures of $61 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $432 million (f.o.b., 1992 est)
commodities: 
  iron ore, fish and fish products
partners: 
  Japan 27%, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg
Imports: 
  $413 million (c.i.f., 1992 est)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, consumer goods, petroleum products, capital goods
partners: 
  Algeria 15%, China 6%, US 3%, France, Germany, Spain, Italy
External debt: 
  $1.9 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.4% (1988 est.); accounts for almost 30% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  190,000 kW
production: 
  135 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  70 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  fish processing, mining of iron ore and gypsum
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 25% of GDP (including fishing); largely subsistence
  farming and nomadic cattle and sheep herding except in Senegal river
  valley; crops - dates, millet, sorghum, root crops; fish products
  number-one export; large food deficit in years of drought
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $168 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.3
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $490 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $277 million; Arab Development Bank (1991), $20
  million 
Currency: 
  1 ouguiya (UM) = 5 khoums
Exchange rates: 
  ouguiyas (UM) per US$1 - 124.480 (December 1993), 87.082 (1992),
  81.946 (1991), 80.609 (1990), 83.051 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Mauritania, Communications

Railroads: 
  690 km 1.435-meter (standard) gauge, single track, owned and operated
  by government mining company
Highways: 
total: 
  7,525 km 
paved: 
  1,685 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, otherwise improved 1,040 km; unimproved earth
  4,800 km (roads, trails, tracks)
Inland waterways: 
  mostly ferry traffic on the Senegal River
Ports: 
  Nouadhibou, Nouakchott
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,290 GRT/1,840 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  28 
usable: 
  28 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  17 
Telecommunications: 
  poor system of cable and open-wire lines, minor microwave radio relay
  links, and radio communications stations (improvements being made);
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, no FM, 1 TV; satellite earth stations - 1
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 2 ARABSAT, with six planned

@Mauritania, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie, National Guard, National
  Police, Presidential Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 467,677; fit for military service 228,385 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $40 million, 4.2% of GDP (1989)


@Mauritius, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the western Indian Ocean, 900 km east of
  Madagascar
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,860 sq km 
land area: 
  1,850 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 10.5 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Agalega Islands, Cargados Carajos Shoals (Saint Brandon), and
  Rodrigues
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  177 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims UK-administered Chagos Archipelago, which includes the island
  of Diego Garcia in UK-administered British Indian Ocean Territory;
  claims French-administered Tromelin Island
Climate: 
  tropical modified by southeast trade winds; warm, dry winter (May to
  November); hot, wet, humid summer (November to May)
Terrain: 
  small coastal plain rising to discontinuous mountains encircling
  central plateau
Natural resources: 
  arable land, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  54% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  31% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  170 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution
natural hazards: 
  subject to cyclones (November to April); almost completely surrounded
  by reefs
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea

@Mauritius, People

Population: 
  1,116,923 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.92% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.28 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.41 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.54 years 
male: 
  66.62 years 
female: 
  74.63 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.22 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mauritian(s) 
adjective: 
  Mauritian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Indo-Mauritian 68%, Creole 27%, Sino-Mauritian 3%, Franco-Mauritian 2%
Religions: 
  Hindu 52%, Christian 28.3% (Roman Catholic 26%, Protestant 2.3%),
  Muslim 16.6%, other 3.1% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Creole, French, Hindi, Urdu, Hakka, Bojpoori 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  80% 
male: 
  85% 
female: 
  75% 
Labor force: 
  335,000 
by occupation: 
  government services 29%, agriculture and fishing 27%, manufacturing
  22%, other 22%
note: 
  43% of population of working age (1985)

@Mauritius, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Mauritius 
conventional short form: 
  Mauritius 
Digraph: 
  MP
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Port Louis 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 districts and 3 dependencies*; Agalega Islands*, Black River,
  Cargados Carajos*, Flacq, Grand Port, Moka, Pamplemousses, Plaines
  Wilhems, Port Louis, Riviere du Rempart, Rodrigues*, Savanne
Independence: 
  12 March 1968 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 12 March (1968) 
Constitution: 
  12 March 1968; amended 12 March 1992
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system with elements of English common law
  in certain areas
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Cassam UTEEM (since 1 July 1992); Vice President
  Rabindranath GHURBURRON (since 1 July 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Sir Anerood JUGNAUTH (since 12 June 1982); Deputy Prime
  Minister Prem NABABSING (since 26 September 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on recommendation of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly: 
  elections last held on 15 September 1991 (next to be held by 15
  September 1996); results - MSM/MMM 53%, MLP/PMSD 38%; seats - (70
  total, 62 elected) MSM/MMM alliance 59 (MSM 29, MMM 26, OPR 2, MTD 2);
  MLP/PMSD 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
government coalition: 
  Militant Socialist Movement (MSM), A. JUGNAUTH; Mauritian Militant
  Movement (MMM), Prem NABABSING (less 12 legislators under the
  leadership of Paul BERENGER, now voting with the opposition);
  Organization of the People of Rodrigues (OPR), Louis Serge CLAIR;
  Democratic Labor Movement (MTD), Anil BAICHOO
opposition: 
  Mauritian Labor Party (MLP), Navin RAMGOOLMAN; Socialist Workers
  Front, Sylvio MICHEL; Mauritian Social Democratic Party (PMSD), X.
  DUVAL; MMM-Berenger Faction, Paul BERENGER
Other political or pressure groups: 
  various labor unions
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INMARSAT, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Anund NEEWOOR 
chancery: 
  Suite 441, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 244-1491 or 1492 
FAX: 
  (202) 966-0983 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Leslie ALEXANDER 
embassy: 
  4th Floor, Rogers House, John Kennedy Street, Port Louis 
mailing address: 
  use Embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [230] 208-9763 through 208-9767 
FAX: 
  [230] 208-9534 
Flag: 
  four equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue, yellow, and green

@Mauritius, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on sugar, manufacturing (mainly textiles), and
  tourism. Sugarcane is grown on about 90% of the cultivated land area
  and accounts for 40% of export earnings. The government's development
  strategy centers on industrialization (with a view to exports),
  agricultural diversification, and tourism. Economic performance in
  1992 was impressive, with 6% real growth and low unemployment.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $8.6 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.3% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $7,800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.6% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.4% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $557 million 
expenditures: 
  $607 million, including capital expenditures of $111 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1.32 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  textiles 44%, sugar 40%, light manufactures 10%
partners: 
  EC and US have preferential treatment, EU 77%, US 15%
Imports: 
  $1.63 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods 50%, capital equipment 17%, foodstuffs 13%,
  petroleum products 8%, chemicals 7%
partners: 
  EC, US, South Africa, Japan
External debt: 
  $991 million (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7% (1990); accounts for 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  235,000 kW
production: 
  630 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  570 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing (largely sugar milling), textiles, wearing apparel,
  chemicals, metal products, transport equipment, nonelectrical
  machinery, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 10% of GDP; about 90% of cultivated land in sugarcane;
  other products - tea, corn, potatoes, bananas, pulses, cattle, goats,
  fish; net food importer, especially rice and fish
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; heroin
  consumption and transshipment are growing problems
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $76 million; Western
  (non-US) countries (1970-89), $709 million; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $54 million 
Currency: 
  1 Mauritian rupee (MauR) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Mauritian rupees (MauRs) per US$1 - 18.696 (January 1994), 17.648
  (1993), 15.563 (1992), 15.652 (1991), 14.839 (1990), 15.250 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Mauritius, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,800 km 
paved: 
  1,640 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 160 km 
Ports: 
  Port Louis
Merchant marine: 
  14 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 162,387 GRT/260,552 DWT, bulk 6,
  cargo 7, liquefied gas 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  small system with good service utilizing primarily microwave radio
  relay; new microwave link to Reunion; high-frequency radio links to
  several countries; over 48,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM,
  no FM, 4 TV; 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Mauritius, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Police Force, including the paramilitary Special Mobile Force
  (SMF), Special Support Units (SSU), and National Coast Guard
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 316,975; fit for military service 161,634 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $5 million, 0.2% of GDP (FY89)


@Mayotte

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territorial collectivity of France) 

@Mayotte, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the northern Mozambique Channel about halfway
  between Madagascar and Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa 
Area: 
total area: 
  375 sq km 
land area: 
  375 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  185.2 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Comoros
Climate: 
  tropical; marine; hot, humid, rainy season during northeastern monsoon
  (November to May); dry season is cooler (May to November)
Terrain: 
  generally undulating with ancient volcanic peaks, deep ravines
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to cyclones during rainy season
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  part of Comoro Archipelago

@Mayotte, People

Population: 
  93,468 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.8% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  48.84 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.84 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  79.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  57.81 years 
male: 
  55.63 years 
female: 
  60.06 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.77 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mahorais (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Mahoran 
Ethnic divisions: 
  NA
Religions: 
  Muslim 99%, Christian (mostly Roman Catholic)
Languages: 
  Mahorian (a Swahili dialect), French 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Mayotte, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territorial Collectivity of Mayotte 
conventional short form: 
  Mayotte 
Digraph: 
  MF
Type: 
  territorial collectivity of France 
Capital: 
  Mamoutzou 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
Independence: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
National holiday: 
  Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  Prefect Jean-Jacques DERACQ (since NA); President of the General
  Council Younoussa BAMANA (since NA 1976) 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
General Council (Conseil General): 
  elections last held March 1991 (next to be held March 1996); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (17 total) MPM 12, RPR 5
French Senate: 
  elections last held on 24 September 1989 (next to be held September
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) MPM 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held 1998);
  results - UDF-CDS 54.3%, RPR 44.3%; seats - (1 total) UDF-CDS 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Tribunal Superieur d'Appel) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Mahoran Popular Movement (MPM), Younoussa BAMANA; Party for the
  Mahoran Democratic Rally (PRDM), Daroueche MAOULIDA; Mahoran Rally for
  the Republic (RPR), Mansour KAMARDINE; Union for French Democracy
  (UDF), Maoulida AHMED; Center of Social Democrats (CDS),
Member of: 
  FZ 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@Mayotte, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is based primarily on the agricultural sector,
  including fishing and livestock raising. Mayotte is not
  self-sufficient and must import a large portion of its food
  requirements, mainly from France. The economy and future development
  of the island are heavily dependent on French financial assistance.
  Mayotte's remote location is an obstacle to the development of
  tourism.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $54 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $37.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1985 est.)
Exports: 
  $4 million (f.o.b., 1984)
commodities: 
  ylang-ylang, vanilla
partners: 
  France 79%, Comoros 10%, Reunion 9%
Imports: 
  $21.8 million (f.o.b., 1984)
commodities: 
  building materials, transportation equipment, rice, clothing, flour
partners: 
  France 57%, Kenya 16%, South Africa 11%, Pakistan 8%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  NA
production: 
  NA
consumption per capita: 
  NA
Industries: 
  newly created lobster and shrimp industry
Agriculture: 
  most important sector; provides all export earnings; crops - vanilla,
  ylang-ylang, coffee, copra; imports major share of food needs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $402 million 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Mayotte, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  42 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 18 km 
unpaved: 
  24 km 
Ports: 
  Dzaoudzi
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  small system administered by French Department of Posts and
  Telecommunications; includes radio relay and high-frequency radio
  communications for links to Comoros and international communications;
  450 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV

@Mayotte, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Mexico, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, between Guatemala and the US
Map references: 
  North America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,972,550 sq km 
land area: 
  1,923,040 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three times the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,538 km, Belize 250 km, Guatemala 962 km, US 3,326 km 
Coastline: 
  9,330 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the natural prolongation of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims Clipperton Island (French possession)
Climate: 
  varies from tropical to desert
Terrain: 
  high, rugged mountains, low coastal plains, high plateaus, and desert
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, silver, copper, gold, lead, zinc, natural gas, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  39% 
forest and woodland: 
  24% 
other: 
  24% 
Irrigated land: 
  51,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  natural water resources scarce and polluted in north, inaccessible and
  poor quality in center and extreme southeast; untreated sewage and
  industrial effluents polluting rivers in urban areas; deforestation;
  widespread erosion; desertification; serious air pollution in the
  national capital and urban centers along US-Mexico border
natural hazards: 
  subject to tsunamis along the Pacific coast, destructive earthquakes
  in the center and south, and hurricanes on the Gulf and Caribbean
  coasts
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands,
  Whaling
Note: 
  strategic location on southern border of US

@Mexico, People

Population: 
  92,202,199 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.94% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  27.17 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.73 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.94 years 
male: 
  69.36 years 
female: 
  76.7 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.17 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mexican(s) 
adjective: 
  Mexican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo (Indian-Spanish) 60%, Amerindian or predominantly Amerindian
  30%, Caucasian or predominantly Caucasian 9%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  nominally Roman Catholic 89%, Protestant 6% 
Languages: 
  Spanish, various Mayan dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  87% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  85% 
Labor force: 
  26.2 million (1990)
by occupation: 
  services 31.7%, agriculture, forestry, hunting, and fishing 28%,
  commerce 14.6%, manufacturing 11.1%, construction 8.4%, transportation
  4.7%, mining and quarrying 1.5%

@Mexico, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  United Mexican States 
conventional short form: 
  Mexico 
local long form: 
  Estados Unidos Mexicanos 
local short form: 
  Mexico 
Digraph: 
  MX
Type: 
  federal republic operating under a centralized government
Capital: 
  Mexico 
Administrative divisions: 
  31 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1 federal district*
  (distrito federal); Aguascalientes, Baja California, Baja California
  Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Colima, Distrito
  Federal*, Durango, Guanajuato, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Mexico,
  Michoacan, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo Leon, Oaxaca, Puebla, Queretaro,
  Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosi, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas,
  Tlaxcala, Veracruz, Yucatan, Zacatecas
Independence: 
  16 September 1810 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 16 September (1810) 
Constitution: 
  5 February 1917
Legal system: 
  mixture of US constitutional theory and civil law system; judicial
  review of legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory (but not enforced)
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Carlos SALINAS de Gortari (since 1 December 1988); election
  last held on 6 July 1988 (next to be held 21 August 1994); results -
  Carlos SALINAS de Gortari (PRI) 50.74%, Cuauhtemoc CARDENAS Solorzano
  (FDN) 31.06%, Manuel CLOUTHIER (PAN) 16.81%; other 1.39%; note -
  several of the smaller parties ran a common candidate under a
  coalition called the National Democratic Front (FDN)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Congress (Congreso de la Union)
Senate (Camara de Senadores): 
  elections last held on 18 August 1991 (next to be held 21 August
  1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats in full Senate -
  (64 total; Senate will expand to 128 seats following next election)
  PRI 62, PRD 1, PAN 1
Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados): 
  elections last held on 18 August 1991 (next to be held 21 August
  1994); results - PRI 53%, PAN 20%, PFCRN 10%, PPS 6%, PARM 7%, PMS
  (now part of PRD) 4%; seats - (500 total) PRI 320, PAN 89, PRD 41,
  PFCRN 23, PARM 15, PPS 12
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  (recognized parties) Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), Ignacio
  Pichardo PAGAZA; National Action Party (PAN), Carlos CASTILLO; Popular
  Socialist Party (PPS), Indalecio SAYAGO Herrera; Democratic
  Revolutionary Party (PRD), Porfirio MUNOZ Ledo; Cardenist Front for
  the National Reconstruction Party (PFCRN), Rafael AGUILAR Talamantes;
  Authentic Party of the Mexican Revolution (PARM), Rosa Maria MARTINEZ
  Denagri; Democratic Forum Party (PFD), Pablo Emilio MADERO; Mexican
  Green Ecologist Party (PVEM), Jorge GONZALEZ Torres
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Roman Catholic Church; Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM);
  Confederation of Industrial Chambers (CONCAMIN); Confederation of
  National Chambers of Commerce (CONCANACO); National Peasant
  Confederation (CNC); Revolutionary Workers Party (PRT); Revolutionary
  Confederation of Workers and Peasants (CROC); Regional Confederation
  of Mexican Workers (CROM); Confederation of Employers of the Mexican
  Republic (COPARMEX); National Chamber of Transformation Industries
  (CANACINTRA); Coordinator for Foreign Trade Business Organizations
  (COECE); Federation of Unions Providing Goods and Services (FESEBES)
Member of: 
  AG (observer), BCIE, CARICOM (observer), CCC, CDB, CG, EBRD, ECLAC,
  FAO, G-3, G-6, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, NAM (observer), OAS,
  OECD, ONUSAL, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTI, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jorge MONTANO Martinez 
chancery: 
  1911 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20006 
telephone: 
  (202) 728-1600 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, El Paso, Houston, Los Angeles,
  Miami, New Orleans, New York, San Antonio, San Diego, San Francisco,
  San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
consulate(s): 
  Albuquerque, Austin, Boston, Brownsville (Texas), Calexico
  (California), Corpus Christi, Del Rio (Texas), Detroit, Eagle Pass
  (Texas), Fresno (California), Loredo, Mc Allen (Texas), Midland
  (Texas), Nogales (Arizona), Oxnard (California), Philadelphia
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador James JONES 
embassy: 
  Paseo de la Reforma 305, Colonia Cuauhtemoc, 06500 Mexico, D.F. 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 3087, Laredo, TX 78044-3087 
telephone: 
  [52] (5) 211-0042 
FAX: 
  [52] (5) 511-9980, 208-3373 
consulate(s) general: 
  Ciudad Juarez, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Tijuana 
consulate(s): 
  Hermosillo, Matamoros, Merida, Nuevo Laredo 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and red; the
  coat of arms (an eagle perched on a cactus with a snake in its beak)
  is centered in the white band

@Mexico, Economy

Overview: 
  Mexico's economy, made up predominantly of private manufacturing and
  services and both large-scale and traditional agriculture, is
  beginning to rebound from the economic difficulties of the 1980s but
  still faces key challenges. During the 1980s, the accumulation of
  large external debts, falling world petroleum prices, rapid population
  growth, and mounting inflation and unemployment plagued the economy.
  In recent years, the government has responded by implementing sweeping
  economic reforms. Strict fiscal and monetary discipline have brought
  inflation under control, reduced the internal debt, and produced
  budgetary surpluses in 1992 and 1993. The tight money policies,
  however, have restricted growth: barely 0.4% in 1993 after a rise of
  2.6% in 1992 and 3.6% in 1991. Another aspect of the reform has been
  the privatization of more than 80% of Mexico's businesses, including
  all of the commercial banks. Seeking out increased trade and
  investment opportunities, the government negotiated the North American
  Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with the United States and Canada, which
  entered into force on 1 January 1994. Within Latin America, Mexico has
  completed bilateral free trade agreements with Chile and Costa Rica,
  and is continuing negotiations with Colombia and Venezuela for a
  trilateral deal in addition to holding trade discussions with various
  other nations. In January of 1993, Mexico replaced its old peso at the
  rate of 1,000 old to 1 new peso. Despite its hard-won economic
  progress and the prospects of long-term gains under NAFTA, Mexico
  still faces difficult problems, including sluggish growth,
  unemployment, continuing social inequalities, serious pollution, and
  the prospect of increased competition with the opening of trade.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $740 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0.4% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $8,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  8% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  10.7% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $58.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $53 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.4 billion (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $50.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.), includes in-bond industries
commodities: 
  crude oil, oil products, coffee, silver, engines, motor vehicles,
  cotton, consumer electronics
partners: 
  US 74%, Japan 8%, EC 4% (1992 est.)
Imports: 
  $65.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.), includes in-bond industries
commodities: 
  metal-working machines, steel mill products, agricultural machinery,
  electrical equipment, car parts for assembly, repair parts for motor
  vehicles, aircraft, and aircraft parts
partners: 
  US 74%, Japan, 11%, EC 6% (1992)
External debt: 
  $125 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.8% (1992 est.); accounts for 28% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  27,000,000 kW
production: 
  120.725 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,300 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food and beverages, tobacco, chemicals, iron and steel, petroleum,
  mining, textiles, clothing, motor vehicles, consumer durables, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 9% of GDP and over 25% of work force; large number of
  small farms at subsistence level; major food crops - corn, wheat,
  rice, beans; cash crops - cotton, coffee, fruit, tomatoes
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis continues in spite of
  active government eradication program; major supplier to the US
  market; continues as the primary transshipment country for US-bound
  cocaine and marijuana from South America
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $3.1 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $7.7
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $110 million 
Currency: 
  1 New Mexican peso (Mex$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  market rate of Mexican pesos (Mex$) per US$1 - 3.3556 (March 1994),
  3,094.9 (1992), 3,018.4 (1991), 2,812.6 (1990), 2,461.3 (1989)
note: 
  the new peso replaced the old peso on 1 January 1993; 1 new peso =
  1,000 old pesos
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Mexico, Communications

Railroads: 
  24,500 km total
Highways: 
total: 
  242,300 km 
paved: 
  84,800 km (including 3,166 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  gravel and earth 157,500 km 
Inland waterways: 
  2,900 km navigable rivers and coastal canals
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 28,200 km; petroleum products 10,150 km; natural gas 13,254
  km; petrochemical 1,400 km 
Ports: 
  Acapulco, Altamira, Coatzacoalcos, Ensenada, Guaymas, Manzanillo,
  Mazatlan, Progreso, Puerto Vallarta, Salina Cruz, Tampico, Tuxpan,
  Veracruz
Merchant marine: 
  58 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 853,161 GRT/1,269,018 DWT, cargo
  3, chemical tanker 4, container 4, liquefied gas 7, oil tanker 32,
  refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 4 
Airports: 
total: 
  1,993 
usable: 
  1,585 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  202 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  35 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  286 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed system with extensive microwave radio relay links;
  privatized in December 1990; connected into Central America Microwave
  System; 6,410,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 679 AM, no FM, 238
  TV, 22 shortwave; 120 domestic satellite terminals; earth stations - 4
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT; launched
  Solidarity I satellite in November 1993

@Mexico, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Defense (including Army and Air Force), Navy (including
  Marines)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 22,779,635; fit for military service 16,619,809; reach
  military age (18) annually 1,053,025 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Micronesia, Federated States of, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, about three-quarters
  of the way between Hawaii and Indonesia
Map references: 
  Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  702 sq km 
land area: 
  702 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than four times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Pohnpei (Ponape), Truk (Chuuk), Yap, and Kosrae
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  6,112 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; heavy year-round rainfall, especially in the eastern
  islands; located on southern edge of the typhoon belt with occasional
  severe damage
Terrain: 
  islands vary geologically from high mountainous islands to low, coral
  atolls; volcanic outcroppings on Pohnpei, Kosrae, and Truk
Natural resources: 
  forests, marine products, deep-seabed minerals 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons (June to December)
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Law of the Sea; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity
Note: 
  four major island groups totaling 607 islands

@Micronesia, Federated States of, People

Population: 
  120,347 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.36% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.3 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  11.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  37.24 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.63 years 
male: 
  65.67 years 
female: 
  69.62 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.01 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Micronesian(s) 
adjective: 
  Micronesian; Kosrae(s), Pohnpeian(s), Trukese, Yapese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  nine ethnic Micronesian and Polynesian groups
Religions: 
  Christian (divided between Roman Catholic and Protestant; other
  churches include Assembly of God, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day
  Adventist, Latter-Day Saints, and the Baha'i Faith)
Languages: 
  English (official and common language), Trukese, Pohnpeian, Yapese,
  Kosrean 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  90% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  85% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  two-thirds are government employees
note: 
  45,000 people are between the ages of 15 and 65

@Micronesia, Federated States of, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Federated States of Micronesia 
conventional short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Kosrae, Ponape, Truk, and Yap Districts (Trust Territory of the
  Pacific Islands) 
Abbreviation: 
  FSM 
Digraph: 
  FM
Type: 
  constitutional government in free association with the US; the Compact
  of Free Association entered into force 3 November 1986
Capital: 
  Kolonia (on the island of Pohnpei)
note: 
  a new capital is being built about 10 km southwest in the Palikir
  valley
Administrative divisions: 
  4 states; Kosrae, Pohnpei, Chuuk (Truk), Yap
Independence: 
  3 November 1986 (from the US-administered UN Trusteeship)
National holiday: 
  Proclamation of the Federated States of Micronesia, 10 May (1979) 
Constitution: 
  10 May 1979
Legal system: 
  based on adapted Trust Territory laws, acts of the legislature,
  municipal, common, and customary laws
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Bailey OLTER (since 21 May 1991); Vice President Jacob NENA
  (since 21 May 1991); election last held ll May 1991 (next to be held
  March 1995); results - President Bailey OLTER elected president;
  Vice-President Jacob NENA
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Congress: 
  elections last held on 5 March 1991 (next to be held March 1993);
  results - percent of vote NA; seats - (14 total)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  no formal parties
Member of: 
  AsDB, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, ITU, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN,
  UNCTAD, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jesse B. MAREHALAU 
chancery: 
  1725 N Street NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 223-4383 
FAX: 
  (202) 223-4391 
consulate(s) general: 
  Honolulu and Tamuning (Guam) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Aurelia E. BRAZEAL 
embassy: 
  address NA, Kolonia 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1286, Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia 96941 
telephone: 
  691-320-2187 
FAX: 
  691-320-2186 
Flag: 
  light blue with four white five-pointed stars centered; the stars are
  arranged in a diamond pattern

@Micronesia, Federated States of, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity consists primarily of subsistence farming and
  fishing. The islands have few mineral deposits worth exploiting,
  except for high-grade phosphate. The potential for a tourist industry
  exists, but the remoteness of the location and a lack of adequate
  facilities hinder development. Financial assistance from the US is the
  primary source of revenue, with the US pledged to spend $1 billion in
  the islands in the l990s. Geographical isolation and a poorly
  developed infrastructure are major impediments to long-term growth.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $150 million (1989 est.)
note: 
  GNP numbers reflect US spending
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1989 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  27% (1989)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $165 million 
expenditures: 
  $115 million, including capital expenditures of $20 million (1988
  est.)
Exports: 
  $2.3 million (f.o.b., 1988)
commodities: 
  copra
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $67.7 million (c.i.f., 1988)
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  18,000 kW
production: 
  40 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  380 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourism, construction, fish processing, craft items from shell, wood,
  and pearls
Agriculture: 
  mainly a subsistence economy; black pepper; tropical fruits and
  vegetables, coconuts, cassava, sweet potatoes, pigs, chickens
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  under terms of the Compact of Free Association, the US will provide
  $1.3 billion in grant aid during the period 1986-2001
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Micronesia, Federated States of, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  226 km 
paved: 
  39 km (on major islands)
unpaved: 
  stone, coral, laterite 187 km 
Ports: 
  Colonia (Yap), Truk, Okat and Lelu (Kosrae)
Airports: 
total: 
  6 
usable: 
  5 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone network - 960 telephone lines total at Kolonia and Truk;
  islands interconnected by shortwave radio (used mostly for government
  purposes); 16,000 radio receivers, 1,125 TV sets (est. 1987);
  broadcast stations - 5 AM, 1 FM, 6 TV, 1 shortwave; 4 Pacific Ocean
  INTELSAT earth stations

@Micronesia, Federated States of, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Midway Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Midway Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 2,350 km
  west-northwest of Honolulu, about one-third of the way between
  Honolulu and Tokyo
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  5.2 sq km 
land area: 
  5.2 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 9 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Eastern Island and Sand Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  15 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, but moderated by prevailing easterly winds
Terrain: 
  low, nearly level
Natural resources: 
  fish, wildlife 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  a coral atoll; closed to the public

@Midway Islands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are 453 US military personnel

@Midway Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Midway Islands 
Digraph: 
  MQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the US Navy, under
  Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Pacific Division. This facility
  has been operationally closed since 10 September 1993 and is currently
  being transferred from Pacific Fleet to Naval Facilities Engineering
  Command via a Memorandum of Understanding.  
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC
Flag: 
  the US flag is used

@Midway Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on providing support services for US naval
  operations located on the islands. All food and manufactured goods
  must be imported.
Electricity: 
  supplied by US Military

@Midway Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  32 km 
paved: 
  NA 
Pipelines: 
  7.8 km 
Ports: 
  Sand Island
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 

@Midway Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Moldova, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Europe, between Ukraine and Romania
Map references: 
  Asia, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  33,700 sq km 
land area: 
  33,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Hawaii
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,389 km, Romania 450 km, Ukraine 939 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  no official territorial claims by either Moldova or Romania, but
  nationalists in Romania seek the merger of Moldova into Romania;
  potential future dispute by Moldova and Romania against Ukraine over
  former southern and northern Bessarabian areas and Northern Bukovina
  ceded to Ukraine upon Moldova's incorporation into USSR
Climate: 
  moderate winters, warm summers
Terrain: 
  rolling steppe, gradual slope south to Black Sea
Natural resources: 
  lignite, phosphorites, gypsum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  50% 
permanent crops: 
  13% 
meadows and pastures: 
  9% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  28% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,920 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  heavy use of agricultural chemicals, including banned pesticides such
  as DDT, has contaminated soil and groundwater; extensive soil erosion
  from poor farming methods
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  landlocked

@Moldova, People

Population: 
  4,473,033 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.38% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.02 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.02 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.2 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  30.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.07 years 
male: 
  64.65 years 
female: 
  71.67 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.18 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Moldovan(s) 
adjective: 
  Moldovan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Moldavian/Romanian 64.5%, Ukrainian 13.8%, Russian 13%, Gagauz 3.5%,
  Jewish 1.5%, Bulgarian 2%, other 1.7% (1989 figures)
note: 
  internal disputes with ethnic Russians and Ukrainians in the Dniester
  region and Gagauz Turks in the south
Religions: 
  Eastern Orthodox 98.5%, Jewish 1.5%, Baptist (only about 1,000
  members) (1991)
note: 
  the large majority of churchgoers are ethnic Moldavian
Languages: 
  Moldovan (official; virtually the same as the Romanian language),
  Russian, Gagauz (a Turkish dialect)
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  2.05 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 34.4%, industry 20.1%, other 45.5% (1985 figures)

@Moldova, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Moldova 
conventional short form: 
  Moldova 
local long form: 
  Republica Moldoveneasca 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova; Moldavia 
Digraph: 
  MD
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Chisinau 
Administrative divisions: 
  previously divided into 40 rayons; new districts possible under new
  constitution in 1994
Independence: 
  27 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 August 1991 
Constitution: 
  old Soviet constitution (adopted NA 1979) is still in effect but has
  been heavily amended during the past few years; a new constitution is
  expected in 1994
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; no judicial review of legislative acts;
  does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction but accepts many UN and
  CSCE documents
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Mircea SNEGUR (since 3 September 1990); election last held 8
  December 1991 (next to be held NA 1996); results - Mircea SNEGUR ran
  unopposed and won 98.17% of vote; note - President SNEGUR was named
  executive president by the Supreme Soviet on 3 September 1990 and was
  confirmed by popular election on 8 December 1991
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Andrei SANGHALI (since 1 July 1992; reappointed 5 April
  1994 after elections for new legislature) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on recommendation of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held 27 February 1994 (next to be held NA 1999);
  results - percent by party NA; seats - (104 total) Agrarian-Democratic
  Party 56, Socialist/Yedinstvo Bloc 28, Peasants and Intellectual Bloc
  11, Christian Democratic Popular Front 9
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Christian Democratic Popular Front (formerly Moldovan Popular Front),
  Iurie ROSCA, chairman; Yedinstvo Intermovement, V. YAKOVLEV, chairman;
  Social Democratic Party, Oazu NANTOI, chairman, two other chairmen;
  Agrarian-Democratic Party, Dumitru MOTPAN, chairman; Democratic Party,
  Gheorghe GHIMPU, chairman; Democratic Labor Party, Alexandru ARSENI,
  chairman; Reform Party, Anatol SELARU; Republican Party, Victor
  PUSCAS; Socialist Party, Valeriu SENIC, chairman; Communist Party,
  Vladimir VORONIN
Other political or pressure groups: 
  United Council of Labor Collectives (UCLC), Igor SMIRNOV, chairman;
  Congress of Intellectuals, Alexandru MOSANU; The Ecology Movement of
  Moldova (EMM), G. MALARCHUK, chairman; The Christian Democratic League
  of Women of Moldova (CDLWM), L. LARI, chairman; National Christian
  Party of Moldova (NCPM), D. TODIKE, M. BARAGA, V. NIKU, leaders; The
  Peoples Movement Gagauz Khalky (GKh), S. GULGAR, leader; The
  Democratic Party of Gagauzia (DPG), G. SAVOSTIN, chairman; The
  Alliance of Working People of Moldova (AWPM), G. POLOGOV, president;
  Christian Alliance for Greater Romania; Stefan the Great Movement;
  Liberal Convention of Moldova; Association of Victims of Repression;
  Christian Democratic Youth League
Member of: 
  BSEC, CE (guest), CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, IBRD, ICAO, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NACC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WHO, WIPO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Nicolae TIU 
chancery: 
  1511 K Street NW, Room 329, Washington, DC 
telephone: 
  (202) 783-3012 or -2807 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mary C. PENDLETON 
embassy: 
  Strada Alexei Mateevich #103, Chisinau 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  373 (2) 23-37-72 or 23-34-76 
FAX: 
  7-0422-23-30-44 
Flag: 
  same color scheme as Romania - 3 equal vertical bands of blue (hoist
  side), yellow, and red; emblem in center of flag is of a Roman eagle
  of gold outlined in black with a red beak and talons carrying a yellow
  cross in its beak and a green olive branch in its right talons and a
  yellow scepter in its left talons; on its breast is a shield divided
  horizontally red over blue with a stylized ox head, star, rose, and
  crescent all in black-outlined yellow

@Moldova, Economy

Overview: 
  Moldova has pushed ahead boldly on economic reform since gaining its
  independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. It introduced a
  convertible currency - the leu - in late 1993 that has remained stable
  against the dollar, removed price controls on most products,
  eliminated licenses and quotas on most imports and exports, and freed
  interest rates. In 1994, Moldova aims to privatize at least one-third
  of state enterprises, lower inflation to 1% per month, and reduce the
  budget deficit to 3.5% of GDP. Moldova enjoys a favorable climate and
  good farmland but has no major mineral deposits. As a result,
  Moldova's economy is primarily based on agriculture, featuring fruits,
  vegetables, wine, and tobacco. Moldova, however, must import all of
  its supplies of oil, coal, and natural gas, and energy shortages have
  contributed to sharp production declines since the break-up of the
  Soviet Union. Activities by separatist groups in the Dniester region
  have held back economic development in that area. Foreign economic
  assistance has been a tangible plus for Moldova, whereas direct
  foreign investment has been lacking.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $16.3 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Moldovan statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,650 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  30% per month (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  less than 1% (includes only officially registered unemployed; large
  numbers of underemployed workers)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
note: 
  budget deficit for 1993 approximately 6% of GDP
Exports: 
  $108 million to outside the FSU countries (January-September 1993);
  over 70% of exports go to FSU countries
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, wine, tobacco, textiles and footwear, machinery, chemicals
  (1991)
partners: 
  Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Romania, Germany
Imports: 
  $145 million from outside the FSU countries (January-September 1993);
  over 70% of imports are from FSU countries
commodities: 
  oil, gas, coal, steel machinery, foodstuffs, automobiles, and other
  consumer durables
partners: 
  Russia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Romania, Germany
External debt: 
  $325 million (end of 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -10% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,115,000 kW
production: 
  11.1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,491 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  key products are canned food, agricultural machinery, foundry
  equipment, refrigerators and freezers, washing machines, hosiery,
  refined sugar, vegetable oil, shoes, textiles
Agriculture: 
  Moldova's principal economic activity; products are vegetables,
  fruits, wine, grain, sugar beets, sunflower seed, meat, milk, tobacco
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of opium poppy and cannabis; mostly for CIS
  consumption; transshipment point for illicit drugs to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Joint EC-US loan (1993), $127 million; IMF STF credit (1993), $64
  million; IMF stand-by loan (1993), $72 million; US commitments
  (1992-93), $61 million in humanitarian aid, $11 million in technical
  assistance; World Bank loan (1993), $60 million; Russia (1993), 50
  billion ruble credit; Romania (1993), 20 billion lei credit
Currency: 
  the leu (plural lei) was introduced in late 1993
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Moldova, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,150 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  20,000 km 
paved or gravelled: 
  13,900 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 6,100 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 310 km (1992)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  26 
usable: 
  15 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  8 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  The telecommunication system of Moldova is not well developed; number
  of telephone subscribers 577,000 (1991); number of subscribers per
  1,000 persons 134 (1991); number of unsuccessful requests for
  telephone service 215,000 (1991); international connections to the
  other former Soviet republics by land line and microwave radio relay
  through Ukraine, and to other countries by leased connections to the
  Moscow international gateway switch; 2 satellite earth stations - 1
  EUTELSAT and 1 INTELSAT; broadcast services NA

@Moldova, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Air and Air Defence Force, Security Forces (internal
  and border troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,098,156; fit for military service 869,866; reach
  military age (18) annually 35,814 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Monaco, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, in southern France
  near the border with Italy
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.9 sq km 
land area: 
  1.9 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about three times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 4.4 km, France 4.4 km 
Coastline: 
  4.1 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  Mediterranean with mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers
Terrain: 
  hilly, rugged, rocky
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling; signed, but
  not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  second smallest independent state in world (after Holy See); almost
  entirely urban

@Monaco, People

Population: 
  31,278 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.81% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  10.71 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.21 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  9.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.69 years 
male: 
  73.94 years 
female: 
  81.64 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.7 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Monacan(s) or Monegasque(s) 
adjective: 
  Monacan or Monegasque 
Ethnic divisions: 
  French 47%, Monegasque 16%, Italian 16%, other 21% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95% 
Languages: 
  French (official), English, Italian, Monegasque 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Monaco, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Principality of Monaco 
conventional short form: 
  Monaco 
local long form: 
  Principaute de Monaco 
local short form: 
  Monaco 
Digraph: 
  MN
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Monaco 
Administrative divisions: 
  4 quarters (quartiers, singular - quartier); Fontvieille, La
  Condamine, Monaco-Ville, Monte-Carlo
Independence: 
  1419 (rule by the House of Grimaldi)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 19 November 
Constitution: 
  17 December 1962
Legal system: 
  based on French law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  25 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Prince RAINIER III (since NA November 1949); Heir Apparent Prince
  ALBERT Alexandre Louis Pierre (born 14 March 1958) 
head of government: 
  Minister of State Jacques DUPONT (since NA 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Government; under the authority of the Prince
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Council (Conseil National): 
  elections last held on 24 January 1988 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (18 total) UND 18
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Tribunal (Tribunal Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National and Democratic Union (UND); Democratic Union Movement (MUD);
  Monaco Action; Monegasque Socialist Party (PSM)
Member of: 
  ACCT, CSCE, ECE, IAEA, ICAO, IMF (observer), IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
honorary consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, New Orleans, New York, San Francisco,
  San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
honorary consulate(s): 
  Dallas, Palm Beach, Philadelphia, and Washington 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no mission in Monaco, but the US Consul General in Marseille, France,
  is accredited to Monaco
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white; similar to the flag
  of Indonesia which is longer and the flag of Poland which is white
  (top) and red

@Monaco, Economy

Overview: 
  Monaco, situated on the French Mediterranean coast, is a popular
  resort, attracting tourists to its casino and pleasant climate. The
  Principality has successfully sought to diversify into services and
  small, high-value-added, nonpolluting industries. The state has no
  income tax and low business taxes and thrives as a tax haven both for
  individuals who have established residence and for foreign companies
  that have set up businesses and offices. About 50% of Monaco's annual
  revenue comes from value-added taxes on hotels, banks, and the
  industrial sector; about 25% of revenue comes from tourism. Living
  standards are high, that is, roughly comparable to those in prosperous
  French metropolitan suburbs.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $475 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $16,000 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NEGL%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $424 million 
expenditures: 
  $376 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $NA; full customs integration with France, which collects and rebates
  Monacan trade duties; also participates in EU market system through
  customs union with France
Imports: 
  $NA; full customs integration with France, which collects and rebates
  Monacan trade duties; also participates in EU market system through
  customs union with France
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,000 kW standby; power imported from France
production: 
  NA
consumption per capita: 
  NA (1992)
Agriculture: 
  none
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Monaco, Communications

Railroads: 
  1.6 km 1.435-meter gauge
Highways: 
  none; city streets
Ports: 
  Monaco
Merchant marine: 
  1 oil tanker (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,268 GRT/4,959 DWT
Airports: 
  1 usable airfield with permanent-surface runways
Telecommunications: 
  served by cable into the French communications system; automatic
  telephone system; 38,200 telephones; broadcast stations - 3 AM, 4 FM,
  5 TV; no communication satellite earth stations

@Monaco, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Mongolia, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Asia, between China and Russia
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.565 million sq km 
land area: 
  1.565 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Alaska
Land boundaries: 
  total 8,114 km, China 4,673 km, Russia 3,441 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  desert; continental (large daily and seasonal temperature ranges)
Terrain: 
  vast semidesert and desert plains; mountains in west and southwest;
  Gobi Desert in southeast
Natural resources: 
  oil, coal, copper, molybdenum, tungsten, phosphates, tin, nickel,
  zinc, wolfram, fluorspar, gold 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  79% 
forest and woodland: 
  10% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  770 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  limited water resources; policies of the former communist regime
  promoting rapid urbanization and industrial growth have raised
  concerns about their negative effects on the environment; the burning
  of soft coal and the concentration of factories in Ulaanbaatar have
  severely polluted the air; deforestation, overgrazing, the converting
  of virgin land to agricultural production have increased soil erosion
  from wind and rain; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
  Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; strategic location between China and Russia

@Mongolia, People

Population: 
  2,429,762 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.61% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  33.04 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.99 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  43.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  66.16 years 
male: 
  63.9 years 
female: 
  68.52 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mongolian(s) 
adjective: 
  Mongolian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Mongol 90%, Kazakh 4%, Chinese 2%, Russian 2%, other 2% 
Religions: 
  predominantly Tibetan Buddhist, Muslim 4% 
note: 
  previously limited religious activity because of Communist regime
Languages: 
  Khalkha Mongol 90%, Turkic, Russian, Chinese 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  primarily herding/agricultural
note: 
  over half the adult population is in the labor force, including a
  large percentage of women; shortage of skilled labor

@Mongolia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Mongolia 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Mongol Uls 
former: 
  Outer Mongolia 
Digraph: 
  MG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Ulaanbaatar 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 provinces (aymguud, singular - aymag) and 3 municipalities*
  (hotuud, singular - hot); Arhangay, Bayanhongor, Bayan-Olgiy, Bulgan,
  Darhan*, Dornod, Dornogovi, Dundgovi, Dzavhan, Erdenet*, Govi-Altay,
  Hentiy, Hovd, Hovsgol, Omnogovi, Ovorhangay, Selenge, Suhbaatar, Tov,
  Ulaanbaatar*, Uvs
Independence: 
  13 March 1921 (from China)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 11 July (1921) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 13 January 1992
Legal system: 
  blend of Russian, Chinese, and Turkish systems of law; no
  constitutional provision for judicial review of legislative acts; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Punsalmaagiyn OCHIRBAT (since 3 September 1990); election
  last held 6 June 1993 (next to be held NA 1997); results -
  Punsalmaagiyn OCHIRBAT (MNDP and MSDP) elected directly with 57.8% of
  the vote; other candidate Lodongiyn TUDEV (MPRP)
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Putsagiyn JASRAY (since 3 August 1992); Deputy Prime
  Ministers Lhamsuren ENEBISH and Choijilsurengiyn PUREVDORJ (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the Great Hural
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
State Great Hural: 
  elections first time held 28 June 1992 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (76 total) MPRP 71, United Party
  4, MSDP 1
note: 
  the People's Small Hural no longer exists
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court serves as appeals court for people's and provincial
  courts, but to date rarely overturns verdicts of lower courts
Political parties and leaders: 
  Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP), Budragchagiin
  DASH-YONDON, secretary general; Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP),
  Erdenijiyn BAT-UUL, general coordinator; National Progress Party
  (NPP), S. BYAMBAA and Luusandambyn DASHNYAM, leaders; Social
  Democratic Party (SDP), BATBAYAR and Tsohiogyyn ADYASUREN, leaders;
  Mongolian Independence Party (MIP), D. ZORIGT, leader; United Party of
  Mongolia (made up of the MDP, SDP, and NPP); Mongolian National
  Democratic Party (MNDP), D. GANBOLD, chairman; Mongolian Social
  Democratic Party (MSDP), B. BATBAYAR, chairman; Mongolian Conservative
  Party, O. ZOYA; Mongolian Green Party (MGP), M. GANBAT
note: 
  opposition parties were legalized in May 1990
Member of: 
  AsDB, CCC, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM
  (observer), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Luvsandorj DAWAGIV 
chancery: 
  2833 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 333-7117 
FAX: 
  (202) 298-9227 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Donald C. JOHNSON 
embassy: 
  address NA, Ulaanbaatar 
mailing address: 
  Ulaanbaatar, c/o American Embassy Beijing, Micro Region II, Big Ring
  Road; PSC 461, Box 300, FPO AP 96521-0002 
telephone: 
  [976] (1) 329095 through 329606 
FAX: 
  [976] (1) 320-776 
Flag: 
  three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist side), blue, and red,
  centered on the hoist-side red band in yellow is the national emblem
  ("soyombo" - a columnar arrangement of abstract and geometric
  representation for fire, sun, moon, earth, water, and the yin-yang
  symbol)

@Mongolia, Economy

Overview: 
  Mongolia's severe climate, scattered population, and wide expanses of
  unproductive land have constrained economic development. Economic
  activity traditionally has been based on agriculture and the breeding
  of livestock - Mongolia has the highest number of livestock per person
  in the world. In past years extensive mineral resources had been
  developed with Soviet support; total Soviet assistance at its height
  amounted to 30% of GDP. The mining and processing of coal, copper,
  molybdenum, tin, tungsten, and gold account for a large part of
  industrial production. Timber and fishing are also important sectors.
  The Mongolian leadership is trying to make the transition from
  Soviet-style central planning to a market economy through
  privatization and price reform, and is soliciting support from
  international financial agencies and foreign investors. The economy,
  however, has still not recovered from the loss of Soviet aid, and the
  country continues to suffer substantial economic hardships.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1.3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  325% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991 est.)
note: 
  deficit of $67 million
Exports: 
  $355 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  copper, livestock, animal products, cashmere, wool, hides, fluorspar,
  other nonferrous metals
partners: 
  former CMEA countries 62%, China 17%, EC 8% (1992)
Imports: 
  $501 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, fuels, food products, industrial consumer
  goods, chemicals, building materials, sugar, tea
partners: 
  USSR 75%, Austria 5%, China 5%
External debt: 
  $16.8 billion (yearend 1990); 98.6% with USSR
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -15% (1992 est.); accounts for about 42% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,248,000 kW
production: 
  3,740 kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,622 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  copper, processing of animal products, building materials, food and
  beverage, mining (particularly coal)
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 35% of GDP and provides livelihood for about 50% of
  the population; livestock raising predominates (primarily sheep and
  goats, but also cattle, camels, and horses); crops - wheat, barley,
  potatoes, forage
Economic aid: 
  NA
Currency: 
  1 tughrik (Tug) = 100 mongos
Exchange rates: 
  tughriks (Tug) per US$1 - 150 (1 January 1993), 40 (1992), 7.1 (1991),
  5.63 (1990), 3.00 (1989)
note: 
  the exchange rate 40 tughriks = 1US$ was introduced June 1991 and was
  in force to the end of 1992
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Mongolia, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,750 km 1.524-meter broad gauge (1988)
Highways: 
total: 
  46,700 km 
paved: 
  1,000 km 
unpaved: 
  45,700 km (1988)
Inland waterways: 
  397 km of principal routes (1988)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  81 
usable: 
  31 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  fewer than 5 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  fewer than 20 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  12 
Telecommunications: 
  63,000 telephones (1989); broadcast stations - 12 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV (with
  18 provincial repeaters); repeat of Russian TV; 120,000 TVs; 220,000
  radios; at least 1 earth station

@Mongolia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Mongolian People's Army (includes Internal Security Forces and
  Frontier Guards), Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 587,113; fit for military service 382,633; reach
  military age (18) annually 25,261 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $22.8 million of GDP, 1% of GDP (1992)


@Montserrat

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Montserrat, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about 400 km southeast of
  Puerto Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  100 sq km 
land area: 
  100 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.6 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  40 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; little daily or seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  volcanic islands, mostly mountainous, with small coastal lowland
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  10% 
forest and woodland: 
  40% 
other: 
  30% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to severe hurricanes (June to November)
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  located 400 km east southeast of Puerto Rico in the Caribbean Sea

@Montserrat, People

Population: 
  12,701 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.33% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.93 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.79 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  11.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.73 years 
male: 
  73.96 years 
female: 
  77.53 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.05 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Montserratian(s) 
adjective: 
  Montserratian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black, Europeans 
Religions: 
  Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal, Seventh-Day
  Adventist, other Christian denominations 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  97% 
Labor force: 
  5,100 
by occupation: 
  community, social, and personal services 40.5%, construction 13.5%,
  trade, restaurants, and hotels 12.3%, manufacturing 10.5%,
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 8.8%, other 14.4% (1983 est.)

@Montserrat, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Montserrat 
Digraph: 
  MH
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Plymouth 
Administrative divisions: 
  3 parishes; Saint Anthony, Saint Georges, Saint Peter
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen (second Saturday of June) 
Constitution: 
  present constitution came into force 19 December 1989
Legal system: 
  English common law and statute law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  Frank SAVAGE (since NA February 1993) 
head of government: 
  Chief Minister Reuben T. MEADE (since October 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; consists of the governor, the chief minister, three
  other ministries, the attorney-general, and the finance secretary
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council: 
  elections last held on 8 October 1991; results - percent of vote by
  party NA; seats - (11 total, 7 elected) NPP 4, NDP 1, PLM 1,
  independent 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Progressive Party (NPP) Reuben T. MEADE; People's Liberation
  Movement (PLM), Noel TUITT; National Development Party (NDP), Bertrand
  OSBORNE; Independent (IND), Ruby BRAMBLE
Member of: 
  CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC (associate), ICFTU, INTERPOL (subbureau), OECS,
  WCL 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Montserratian coat of arms centered in the outer half of the flag; the
  coat of arms features a woman standing beside a yellow harp with her
  arm around a black cross

@Montserrat, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is small and open with economic activity centered on
  tourism and construction. Tourism is the most important sector and
  accounts for roughly one-fifth of GDP. Agriculture accounts for about
  4% of GDP and industry 10%. The economy is heavily dependent on
  imports, making it vulnerable to fluctuations in world prices. Exports
  consist mainly of electronic parts sold to the US.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $53.7 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.3% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,300 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.8% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  3% (1987)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $12.1 million 
expenditures: 
  $14.3 million, including capital expenditures of $3.2 million (1988
  est.)
Exports: 
  $2.8 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  electronic parts, plastic bags, apparel, hot peppers, live plants,
  cattle
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $80.6 million (f.o.b.,1992)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment, foodstuffs, manufactured
  goods, fuels, lubricants, and related materials
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $2.05 million (1987)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 8.1% (1986); accounts for 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,271 kW
production: 
  12 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  950 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism; light manufacturing - rum, textiles, electronic appliances
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4% of GDP; small-scale farming; food crops - tomatoes,
  onions, peppers; not self-sufficient in food, especially livestock
  products
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $90 million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Montserrat, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  280 km 
paved: 
  200 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 80 km 
Ports: 
  Plymouth
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  3,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 8 AM, 4 FM, 1 TV

@Montserrat, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Police Force 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Morocco, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, bordering the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean
  Sea, between Algeria and Western Sahara
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  446,550 sq km 
land area: 
  446,300 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,002 km, Algeria 1,559 km, Western Sahara 443 km 
Coastline: 
  1,835 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims and administers Western Sahara, but sovereignty is unresolved;
  the UN is attempting to hold a referendum; the UN-administered
  cease-fire has been currently in effect since September 1991; Spain
  controls five places of sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off
  the coast of Morocco - the coastal enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla which
  Morocco contests as well as the islands of Penon de Alhucemas, Penon
  de Velez de la Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas
Climate: 
  Mediterranean, becoming more extreme in the interior
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with rich coastal plains
Natural resources: 
  phosphates, iron ore, manganese, lead, zinc, fish, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  18% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  28% 
forest and woodland: 
  12% 
other: 
  41% 
Irrigated land: 
  12,650 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  land degradation/desertification (soil erosion resulting from farming
  of marginal areas, overgrazing, destruction of vegetation); water
  supplies contaminated by untreated sewage; siltation of reservoirs;
  oil pollution of coastal waters
natural hazards: 
  northern mountains geologically unstable and subject to earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection
Note: 
  strategic location along Strait of Gibraltar

@Morocco, People

Population: 
  28,558,635 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.12% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  28.59 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.26 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  49.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.23 years 
male: 
  66.36 years 
female: 
  70.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Moroccan(s) 
adjective: 
  Moroccan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab-Berber 99.1%, other 0.7%, Jewish 0.2% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 98.7%, Christian 1.1%, Jewish 0.2% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), Berber dialects, French often the language of
  business, government, and diplomacy
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  50% 
male: 
  61% 
female: 
  38% 
Labor force: 
  7.4 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 50%, services 26%, industry 15%, other 9% (1985)

@Morocco, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Morocco 
conventional short form: 
  Morocco 
local long form: 
  Al Mamlakah al Maghribiyah 
local short form: 
  Al Maghrib 
Digraph: 
  MO
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Rabat 
Administrative divisions: 
  37 provinces and 5 municipalities* (wilayas, singular - wilaya);
  Agadir, Al Hoceima, Azilal, Beni Mellal, Ben Slimane, Boulemane,
  Casablanca*, Chaouen, El Jadida, El Kelaa des Srarhna, Er Rachidia,
  Essaouira, Fes, Fes*, Figuig, Guelmim, Ifrane, Kenitra, Khemisset,
  Khenifra, Khouribga, Laayoune, Larache, Marrakech, Marrakech*, Meknes,
  Meknes*, Nador, Ouarzazate, Oujda, Rabat-Sale*, Safi, Settat, Sidi
  Kacem, Tanger, Tan-Tan, Taounate, Taroudannt, Tata, Taza, Tetouan,
  Tiznit
Independence: 
  2 March 1956 (from France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 3 March (1961) (anniversary of King Hassan II's
  accession to the throne)
Constitution: 
  10 March 1972, revised 4 September 1992
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law and French and Spanish civil law system; judicial
  review of legislative acts in Constitutional Chamber of Supreme Court
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King HASSAN II (since 3 March 1961) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Abdellatif FILALI (since 29 May 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the King
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Chamber of Representatives (Majlis Nawab): 
  elections last held 15 June 1993 (direct popular vote) and 17
  September 1993 (indirect special interest vote); next to be held NA
  1999; results - seats (333 total), direct popular vote (222 seats)
  USFP 48, IP 43, MP 33, RNI 28, UC 27, PND 14, MNP 14, PPS 6, PDI 3,
  SAP 2, PA 2, OADP 2; indirect special interest vote (111 seats) UC 27,
  MP 18, RNI 13, MNP 11, PND 10, IP 7, Party of Shura and Istiqlal 6,
  USFP 4, PPS 4, CDT 4, UTM 3, UGTM 2, SAP 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
opposition: 
  Socialist Union of Popular Forces (USFP), leader NA; Istiqlal Party
  (IP), M'Hamed BOUCETTA; Party of Progress and Socialism (PPS), Ali
  YATA; Organization of Democratic and Popular Action (OADP), leader NA
pro-government: 
  Constitutional Union (UC), Maati BOUABID; Popular Movement (MP),
  Mohamed LAENSER; National Democratic Party (PND), Mohamed Arsalane
  EL-JADIDI; National Popular Movement, Mahjoubi AHARDANE
independents: 
  National Rally of Independents (RNI), Ahmed OSMAN; Democracy and
  Istiqlal Party (PDI), leader NA; Action Party (PA), leader NA;
  Non-Obedience Candidates (SAP), leader NA
labor unions and community organizations (indirect
elections: 
  Democratic Confederation of Labor (CDT), leader NA; General Union of
  Moroccan Workers (UGTM), leader NA; Moroccan Union of Workers (UTM),
  leader NA; Party of Shura and Istiqlal, leader NA
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACCT (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, EBRD, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, OAS (observer), NAM, OIC, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNOSOM, UNTAC, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mohamed BENAISSA 
chancery: 
  1601 21st Street NW, Washington, DC 20009; 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-7979 through 7982 
FAX: 
  (202) 265-0161 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Marc C. GINSBERG 
embassy: 
  2 Avenue de Marrakech, Rabat 
mailing address: 
  PSC 74, Box 003 APO AE 09718 
telephone: 
  [212] (7) 76-22-65 
FAX: 
  [212] (7) 76-56-61 
consulate(s) general: 
  Casablanca 
Flag: 
  red with a green pentacle (five-pointed, linear star) known as
  Solomon's seal in the center of the flag; green is the traditional
  color of Islam

@Morocco, Economy

Overview: 
  Morocco faces the typical problems of developing
  countries--restraining government spending, reducing constraints on
  private activity and foreign trade, and keeping inflation within
  bounds. Since the early 1980s the government has pursued an economic
  program toward these objectives with the support of the IMF, the World
  Bank, and the Paris Club of creditors. The economy has substantial
  assets to draw on: the world's largest phosphate reserves, diverse
  agricultural and fishing resources, a sizable tourist industry, a
  growing manufacturing sector, and large remittances from Moroccans
  working abroad. However, a severe drought in 1992-93 has depressed
  economic activity and held down experts. Real GDP contracted by 2.9%
  in 1992, and growth for 1993 is estimated at only 2%. Despite these
  setbacks, initiatives to relax capital controls, strengthen the
  banking sector, and privatize state enterprises went forward in 1993.
  Servicing the large debt, high unemployment, and vulnerability to
  external economic forces remain long-term problems for Morocco.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $70.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.5% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  16% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $7.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $7.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.9 billion (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $5.7 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  food and beverages 30%, semiprocessed goods 23%, consumer goods 21%,
  phosphates 17%
partners: 
  EC 64%, India 6%, Japan 4%, US 3%
Imports: 
  $8.4 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  capital goods 24%, semiprocessed goods 22%, raw materials 16%, fuel
  and lubricants 16%, food and beverages 13%, consumer goods 9%
partners: 
  EC 63%, US 6%, Saudi Arabia 4%, FSU 4%, Japan 1%
External debt: 
  $21.3 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0.1% (year NA); accounts for 31% of GDP (1991)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,384,000 kW
production: 
  8.864 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  317 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  phosphate rock mining and processing, food processing, leather goods,
  textiles, construction, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 14% of GDP, 50% of employment, and 30% of export value;
  not self-sufficient in food; cereal farming and livestock raising
  predominate; barley, wheat, citrus fruit, wine, vegetables, olives
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of hashish; trafficking on the increase for both
  domestic and international drug markets; shipments of hashish mostly
  directed to Western Europe; occasional transit point for cocaine from
  South America destined for Western Europe.
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.3 billion; US
  commitments, including Ex-Im (1992), $123.6 million; Western (non-US)
  countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $7.5 billion;
  OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $4.8 billion; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $2.5 billion 
note: 
  $2.8 billion debt canceled by Saudi Arabia (1991); IMF standby
  agreement worth $13 million; World Bank, $450 million (1991)
Currency: 
  1 Moroccan dirham (DH) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Moroccan dirhams (DH) per US$1 - 9.669 (January 1994), 9.299 (1993),
  8.538 (1992), 8.707 (1991), 8.242 (1990), 8.488 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Morocco, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,893 km 1.435-meter standard gauge (246 km double track, 974 km
  electrified)
Highways: 
total: 
  59,198 km 
paved: 
  27,740 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, improved earth, unimproved earth 31,458 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 362 km; petroleum products (abandoned) 491 km; natural gas
  241 km 
Ports: 
  Agadir, Casablanca, El Jorf Lasfar, Kenitra, Mohammedia, Nador, Safi,
  Tangier; also Spanish-controlled Ceuta and Melilla
Merchant marine: 
  47 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 226,369 GRT/335,089 DWT, cargo
  9, chemical tanker 11, container 3, oil tanker 4, refrigerated cargo
  12, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  73 
usable: 
  64 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  26 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  13 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  25 
Telecommunications: 
  good system composed of wire lines, cables, and microwave radio relay
  links; principal centers are Casablanca and Rabat; secondary centers
  are Fes, Marrakech, Oujda, Tangier, and Tetouan; 280,000 telephones
  (10.5 telephones per 1,000 persons); broadcast stations - 20 AM, 7 FM,
  26 TV and 26 repeaters; 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations -
  2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1 ARABSAT; microwave radio relay to
  Gibraltar, Spain, and Western Sahara; coaxial cable and microwave to
  Algeria; microwave radio relay network linking Syria, Jordan, Egypt,
  Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco

@Morocco, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Moroccan Army, Royal Moroccan Navy, Royal Moroccan Air Force,
  Royal Gendarmerie, Auxiliary Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 7,076,261; fit for military service 4,494,641; reach
  military age (18) annually 317,093 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.1 billion, 3.8% of GDP (1993 budget)


@Mozambique, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, bordering the Mozambique Channel between South Africa
  and Tanzania opposite the island of Madagascar
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  801,590 sq km 
land area: 
  784,090 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of California
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,571 km, Malawi 1,569 km, South Africa 491 km, Swaziland 105
  km, Tanzania 756 km, Zambia 419 km, Zimbabwe 1,231 km 
Coastline: 
  2,470 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical to subtropical
Terrain: 
  mostly coastal lowlands, uplands in center, high plateaus in
  northwest, mountains in west
Natural resources: 
  coal, titanium 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  56% 
forest and woodland: 
  20% 
other: 
  20% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,150 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  civil strife in the hinterlands has resulted in increased migration to
  urban and coastal areas with adverse environmental consequences;
  desertification; pollution of surface and coastal waters
natural hazards: 
  severe drought and floods occur in central and southern provinces
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea

@Mozambique, People

Population: 
  17,346,280 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  5.87% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  44.97 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  16.33 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  30.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  128.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  48.49 years 
male: 
  46.63 years 
female: 
  50.41 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.25 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Mozambican(s) 
adjective: 
  Mozambican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  indigenous tribal groups, Europeans about 10,000, Euro-Africans
  35,000, Indians 15,000
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 60%, Christian 30%, Muslim 10% 
Languages: 
  Portuguese (official), indigenous dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  33% 
male: 
  45% 
female: 
  21% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  90% engaged in agriculture

@Mozambique, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Mozambique 
conventional short form: 
  Mozambique 
local long form: 
  Republica Popular de Mocambique 
local short form: 
  Mocambique 
Digraph: 
  MZ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Maputo 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Cabo Delgado, Gaza,
  Inhambane, Manica, Maputo, Nampula, Niassa, Sofala, Tete, Zambezia
Independence: 
  25 June 1975 (from Portugal)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 25 June (1975) 
Constitution: 
  30 November 1990
Legal system: 
  based on Portuguese civil law system and customary law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO (since 6 November 1986) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Mario da Graca MACHUNGO (since 17 July 1986) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Assembly of the Republic (Assembleia da Republica); draft
  electoral law provides for periodic, direct presidential and Assembly
  elections
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (FRELIMO), Joaquim Alberto
  CHISSANO, chairman; formerly a Marxist organization with close ties to
  the USSR; FRELIMO was the only legal party before 30 November 1990,
  when the new Constitution went into effect establishing a multiparty
  system
note: 
  under the terms of the 1992 peace accords multiparty elections are
  scheduled for October 1994; 11 parties, including the Mozambique
  National Resistance (RENAMO), Alfonso DHLAKAMA, president, are
  registered to participate
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA, FAO, FLS, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, INMARSAT, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM,
  OAU, OIC, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Hipolito Pereira Zozimo PATRICIO 
chancery: 
  Suite 570, 1990 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 293-7146 
FAX: 
  (202) 835-0245 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dennis JETT 
embassy: 
  Avenida Kenneth Kuanda, 193 Maputo 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 783, Maputo 
telephone: 
  [258] (1) 49-27-97 
FAX: 
  [258] (1) 49-01-14 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), black, and yellow with a
  red isosceles triangle based on the hoist side; the black band is
  edged in white; centered in the triangle is a yellow five-pointed star
  bearing a crossed rifle and hoe in black superimposed on an open white
  book

@Mozambique, Economy

Overview: 
  One of Africa's poorest countries, Mozambique has failed to exploit
  the economic potential of its sizable agricultural, hydropower, and
  transportation resources. Indeed, national output, consumption, and
  investment declined throughout the first half of the 1980s because of
  internal disorders, lack of government administrative control, and a
  growing foreign debt. A sharp increase in foreign aid, attracted by an
  economic reform policy, resulted in successive years of economic
  growth in the late 1980s, but aid has declined steadily since 1989.
  Agricultural output is at only 75% of its 1981 level, and grain has to
  be imported. Industry operates at only 20-40% of capacity. The economy
  depends heavily on foreign assistance to keep afloat. Peace accords
  signed in October 1992 improved chances of foreign investment, aided
  IMF-supported economic reforms, and supported continued economic
  recovery.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $9.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  40% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  50% (1989 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $252 million 
expenditures: 
  $607 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $164.4 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  shrimp 48%, cashews 21%, sugar 10%, copra 3%, citrus 3%
partners: 
  US, Western Europe, Germany, Japan
Imports: 
  $1.03 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  food, clothing, farm equipment, petroleum
partners: 
  US, Western Europe, USSR
External debt: 
  $5 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5% (1989 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,270,000 kW
production: 
  1.745 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  115 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  food, beverages, chemicals (fertilizer, soap, paints), petroleum
  products, textiles, nonmetallic mineral products (cement, glass,
  asbestos), tobacco
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 50% of GDP and about 90% of exports; cash crops - cotton,
  cashew nuts, sugarcane, tea, shrimp; other crops - cassava, corn,
  rice, tropical fruits; not self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $350 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $4.4
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $37 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $890 million 
Currency: 
  1 metical (Mt) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  meticais (Mt) per US$1 - 4,941.3 (October 1993), 2,550.40 (1992),
  1,763.99 (1991), 1,053.09 (1990), 844.34 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Mozambique, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,288 km total; 3,140 km 1.067-meter gauge; 148 km 0.762-meter narrow
  gauge; Malawi-Nacala, Malawi-Beira, and Zimbabwe-Maputo lines are
  subject to closure because of insurgency
Highways: 
total: 
  26,498 km 
paved: 
  4,593 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 829 km; unimproved earth
  21,076 km 
Inland waterways: 
  about 3,750 km of navigable routes
Pipelines: 
  crude oil (not operating) 306 km; petroleum products 289 km 
Ports: 
  Maputo, Beira, Nacala
Merchant marine: 
  4 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,686 GRT/9,742 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  194 
usable: 
  134 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  24 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  28 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system of troposcatter, open-wire lines, and radio relay;
  broadcast stations - 29 AM, 4 FM, 1 TV; earth stations - 2 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT and 3 domestic Indian Ocean INTELSAT

@Mozambique, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Naval Command, Air and Air Defense Forces, Militia 
note: 
  as of early 1994, Mozambique was demobilizing and reorganizing its
  defence forces
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 3,890,532; fit for military service 2,233,824 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $118 million, 8% of GDP (1993)


@Namibia, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean between Angola and
  South Africa
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  825,418 sq km 
land area: 
  825,418 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than half the size of Alaska
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,824 km, Angola 1,376 km, Botswana 1,360 km, South Africa 855
  km, Zambia 233 km 
Coastline: 
  1,572 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of boundary with Botswana is indefinite; quadripoint
  with Botswana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe is in disagreement; dispute with
  South Africa over Walvis Bay and 12 offshore islands has been resolved
  and these territories were transferred to Namibian sovereignty on 1
  March 1994
Climate: 
  desert; hot, dry; rainfall sparse and erratic
Terrain: 
  mostly high plateau; Namib Desert along coast; Kalahari Desert in east
Natural resources: 
  diamonds, copper, uranium, gold, lead, tin, lithium, cadmium, zinc,
  salt, vanadium, natural gas, fish; suspected deposits of oil, natural
  gas, coal, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  64% 
forest and woodland: 
  22% 
other: 
  13% 
Irrigated land: 
  40 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  very limited natural water resources; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Namibia, People

Population: 
  1,595,567 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.45% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.4 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.87 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  61.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  61.65 years 
male: 
  58.97 years 
female: 
  64.4 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.4 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Namibian(s) 
adjective: 
  Namibian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 86%, white 6.6%, mixed 7.4% 
note: 
  about 50% of the population belong to the Ovambo tribe and 9% to the
  Kavangos tribe
Religions: 
  Christian 
Languages: 
  English 7% (official), Afrikaans common language of most of the
  population and about 60% of the white population, German 32%,
  indigenous languages 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1960)
total population: 
  38% 
male: 
  45% 
female: 
  31% 
Labor force: 
  500,000 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 60%, industry and commerce 19%, services 8%, government
  7%, mining 6% (1981 est.)

@Namibia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Namibia 
conventional short form: 
  Namibia 
Digraph: 
  WA
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Windhoek 
Administrative divisions: 
  13 districts; Erango, Hardap, Karas, Khomas, Kunene, Liambezi,
  Ohanguena, Okarango, Omaheke, Omusat, Oshana, Oshikoto, Otjozondjupa  
Independence: 
  21 March 1990 (from South African mandate)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 21 March (1990) 
Constitution: 
  ratified 9 February 1990; effective 12 March 1990
Legal system: 
  based on Roman-Dutch law and 1990 constitution
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Sam NUJOMA (since 21 March 1990); election last held 16
  February 1990 (next to be held March 1995); results - Sam NUJOMA was
  elected president by the Constituent Assembly (now the National
  Assembly)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from the National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral legislature
National Council: 
  elections last held 30 November-3 December 1992 (next to be held by
  December 1998); seats - (26 total) SWAPO 19, DTA 6, UDF 1
National Assembly: 
  elections last held on 7-11 November 1989 (next to be held by November
  1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (72 total) SWAPO
  41, DTA 21, UDF 4, ACN 3, NNF 1, FCN 1, NPF 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), Sam NUJOMA; DTA of
  Namibia (formerly Democratic Turnhalle Alliance) (DTA), Mishake
  MUYONGO; United Democratic Front (UDF), Justus GAROEB; Action
  Christian National (ACN), Kosie PRETORIUS; National Patriotic Front
  (NPF), Moses KATJIUONGUA; Federal Convention of Namibia (FCN), Hans
  DIERGAARDT; Namibia National Front (NNF), Vekuii RUKORO
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, FLS, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Tuliameni KALOMOH 
chancery: 
  1605 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 986-0540 
FAX: 
  (202) 986-0443 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Howard F. JETER 
embassy: 
  Ausplan Building, 14 Lossen St., Windhoek 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 9890, Windhoek 9000 
telephone: 
  [264] (61) 221-601, 222-675, 222-680 
FAX: 
  [264] (61) 229-792 
Flag: 
  a large blue triangle with a yellow sunburst fills the upper left
  section, and an equal green triangle (solid) fills the lower right
  section; the triangles are separated by a red stripe that is
  contrasted by two narrow white-edge borders

@Namibia, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is heavily dependent on the mining industry to extract and
  process minerals for export. Mining accounts for almost 25% of GDP.
  Namibia is the fourth-largest exporter of nonfuel minerals in Africa
  and the world's fifth-largest producer of uranium. Alluvial diamond
  deposits are among the richest in the world, making Namibia a primary
  source for gem-quality diamonds. Namibia also produces large
  quantities of lead, zinc, tin, silver, and tungsten. More than half
  the population depends on agriculture (largely subsistence
  agriculture) for its livelihood.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3.85 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.5% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $2,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  17.9% (1992) in urban area
Unemployment rate: 
  30% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $941 million 
expenditures: 
  $1.05 billion, including capital expenditures of $157 million
  (FY93/94)
Exports: 
  $1.289 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  diamonds, copper, gold, zinc, lead, uranium, cattle, processed fish,
  karakul skins
partners: 
  Switzerland, South Africa, Germany, Japan
Imports: 
  $1.178 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, petroleum products and fuel, machinery and equipment
partners: 
  South Africa, Germany, US, Switzerland
External debt: 
  about $220 million (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.9% (1991); accounts for 35% of GDP, including mining
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  490,000 kW
production: 
  1.29 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  850 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  meatpacking, fish processing, dairy products, mining (copper, lead,
  zinc, diamond, uranium)
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 15% of GDP; mostly subsistence farming; livestock raising
  major source of cash income; crops - millet, sorghum, peanuts; fish
  catch potential of over 1 million metric tons not being fulfilled,
  1988 catch reaching only 384,000 metric tons; not self-sufficient in
  food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-87), $47.2 million 
Currency: 
  1 South African rand (R) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  South African rand (R) per US$1 - 3.4096 (January 1994), 3.2678
  (1993), 2.8497 (1992), 2.7653 (1991), 2.5863 (1990), 2.6166 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Namibia, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,341 km 1.067-meter gauge, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  54,500 km 
paved: 
  4,080 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 2,540 km; earth 47,880 km (roads and tracks)
Ports: 
  Luderitz; Walvis Bay
Airports: 
total: 
  136 
usable: 
  109 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  21 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  64 
Telecommunications: 
  good urban, fair rural services; radio relay connects major towns,
  wires extend to other population centers; 62,800 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 4 AM, 40 FM, 3 TV

@Namibia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Defense Force (Army), Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 336,145; fit for military service 199,337 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $66 million, 3.4% of GDP (FY92)


@Nauru, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, 500 km north-northeast of Papua New Guinea
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  21 sq km 
land area: 
  21 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about one-tenth the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  30 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; monsoonal; rainy season (November to February)
Terrain: 
  sandy beach rises to fertile ring around raised coral reefs with
  phosphate plateau in center
Natural resources: 
  phosphates 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  limited water resources, roof storage tanks collect rainwater;
  phosphate mining threatens limited remaining land resources
natural hazards: 
  rainfall is erratic
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Marine Dumping; signed, but
  not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  Nauru is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific
  Ocean - the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and Makatea
  in French Polynesia; only 53 km south of Equator

@Nauru, People

Population: 
  10,019 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.33% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  18.03 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.1 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  40.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  66.68 years 
male: 
  64.3 years 
female: 
  69.18 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.08 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Nauruan(s) 
adjective: 
  Nauruan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Nauruan 58%, other Pacific Islander 26%, Chinese 8%, European 8% 
Religions: 
  Christian (two-thirds Protestant, one-third Roman Catholic)
Languages: 
  Nauruan (official; a distinct Pacific Island language), English widely
  understood, spoken, and used for most government and commercial
  purposes
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
by occupation: 
  NA

@Nauru, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Nauru 
conventional short form: 
  Nauru 
former: 
  Pleasant Island 
Digraph: 
  NR
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  no official capital; government offices in Yaren District
Administrative divisions: 
  14 districts; Aiwo, Anabar, Anetan, Anibare, Baiti, Boe, Buada,
  Denigomodu, Ewa, Ijuw, Meneng, Nibok, Uaboe, Yaren
Independence: 
  31 January 1968 (from UN trusteeship under Australia, New Zealand, and
  UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 31 January (1968) 
Constitution: 
  29 January 1968
Legal system: 
  own Acts of Parliament and British common law
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Bernard DOWIYOGO (since 12 December 1989); election last
  held 19 November 1992 (next to be held NA November 1995); results -
  Bernard DOWIYOGO elected by Parliament
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from the parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held on 14 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1995); results - percent of vote NA; seats - (18 total) independents
  18
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Member of: 
  AsDB, C (special), ESCAP, ICAO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user),
  INTERPOL, ITU, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UPU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
consulate(s): 
  Agana (Guam) 
US diplomatic representation: 
  the US Ambassador to Australia is accredited to Nauru
Flag: 
  blue with a narrow, horizontal, yellow stripe across the center and a
  large white 12-pointed star below the stripe on the hoist side; the
  star indicates the country's location in relation to the Equator (the
  yellow stripe) and the 12 points symbolize the 12 original tribes of
  Nauru

@Nauru, Economy

Overview: 
  Revenues come from the export of phosphates, the reserves of which are
  expected to be exhausted by the year 2000. Phosphates have given
  Nauruans one of the highest per capita incomes in the Third World -
  $10,000 annually. Few other resources exist, so most necessities must
  be imported, including fresh water from Australia. The rehabilitation
  of mined land and the replacement of income from phosphates are
  serious long-term problems. Substantial amounts of phosphate income
  are invested in trust funds to help cushion the transition.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $90 million (1989 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $10,000 (1989 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  0% 
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $69.7 million 
expenditures: 
  $51.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1986 est.)
Exports: 
  $93 million (f.o.b., 1984)
commodities: 
  phosphates
partners: 
  Australia, NZ
Imports: 
  $73 million (c.i.f., 1984)
commodities: 
  food, fuel, manufactures, building materials, machinery
partners: 
  Australia, UK, NZ, Japan
External debt: 
  $33.3 million 
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  14,000 kW
production: 
  50 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,430 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  phosphate mining, financial services, coconut products
Agriculture: 
  coconuts; other agricultural activity negligible; almost completely
  dependent on imports for food and water
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries (1970-89), $2 million 
Currency: 
  1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364 (January 1994), 1.4704
  (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2834 (1991), 1.2799 (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Nauru, Communications

Railroads: 
  3.9 km; used to haul phosphates from the center of the island to
  processing facilities on the southwest coast
Highways: 
total: 
  27 km 
paved: 
  21 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 6 km 
Ports: 
  Nauru
Merchant marine: 
  1 bulk ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,426 GRT/5,750 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate local and international radio communications provided via
  Australian facilities; 1,600 telephones; 4,000 radios; broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Nauru, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Directorate of the Nauru Police Force 
note: 
  no regular armed forces
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA - no formal defense structure


@Navassa Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Navassa Island, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the Caribbean Sea, 160 km south of the US Naval Base at
  Guantanamo Bay (Cuba), between Cuba, Haiti, and Jamaica
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  5.2 sq km 
land area: 
  5.2 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about nine times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  8 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Haiti
Climate: 
  marine, tropical
Terrain: 
  raised coral and limestone plateau, flat to undulating; ringed by
  vertical white cliffs (9 to 15 meters high)
Natural resources: 
  guano 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  10% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  90% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategic location 160 km south of the US Naval Base at Guantanamo
  Bay, Cuba; mostly exposed rock, but enough grassland to support goat
  herds; dense stands of fig-like trees, scattered cactus

@Navassa Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited; note - transient Haitian fishermen and others camp on the
  island

@Navassa Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Navassa Island 
Digraph: 
  BQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the US Coast Guard
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC

@Navassa Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Navassa Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only

@Navassa Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Nepal, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, in the Himalayas, between China and India
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  140,800 sq km 
land area: 
  136,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Arkansas
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,926 km, China 1,236 km, India 1,690 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  varies from cool summers and severe winters in north to subtropical
  summers and mild winters in south
Terrain: 
  Terai or flat river plain of the Ganges in south, central hill region,
  rugged Himalayas in north
Natural resources: 
  quartz, water, timber, hydroelectric potential, scenic beauty, small
  deposits of lignite, copper, cobalt, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  17% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  13% 
forest and woodland: 
  33% 
other: 
  37% 
Irrigated land: 
  9,430 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  the almost total dependence on wood for fuel and cutting down trees to
  expand agricultural land without replanting has resulted in widespread
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution (use of contaminated
  water presents human health risks)
natural hazards: 
  vulnerable to severe thunderstorms, flooding, landslides, drought, and
  famine depending on the timing, intensity, and duration of the summer
  monsoons
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Tropical Timber, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Climate Change,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  landlocked; strategic location between China and India; contains eight
  of world's 10 highest peaks

@Nepal, People

Population: 
  21,041,527 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.44% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  37.63 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  13.28 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  83.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  52.53 years 
male: 
  52.35 years 
female: 
  52.73 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.24 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Nepalese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Nepalese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Newars, Indians, Tibetans, Gurungs, Magars, Tamangs, Bhotias, Rais,
  Limbus, Sherpas 
Religions: 
  Hindu 90%, Buddhist 5%, Muslim 3%, other 2% (1981)
note: 
  only official Hindu state in world, although no sharp distinction
  between many Hindu and Buddhist groups
Languages: 
  Nepali (official), 20 languages divided into numerous dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  26% 
male: 
  38% 
female: 
  13% 
Labor force: 
  8.5 million (1991 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 93%, services 5%, industry 2%
note: 
  severe lack of skilled labor

@Nepal, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Nepal 
conventional short form: 
  Nepal 
Digraph: 
  NP
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy as of 12 May 1991
Capital: 
  Kathmandu 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 zones (anchal, singular and plural); Bagmati, Bheri, Dhawalagiri,
  Gandaki, Janakpur, Karnali, Kosi, Lumbini, Mahakali, Mechi, Narayani,
  Rapti, Sagarmatha, Seti
Independence: 
  1768 (unified by Prithvi Narayan Shah)
National holiday: 
  Birthday of His Majesty the King, 28 December (1945) 
Constitution: 
  9 November 1990
Legal system: 
  based on Hindu legal concepts and English common law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Girija Prasad KOIRALA (since 29 May 1991) 
chief of state: 
  King BIRENDRA Bir Bikram Shah Dev (since 31 January 1972, crowned King
  24 February 1985); Heir Apparent Crown Prince DIPENDRA Bir Bikram Shah
  Dev, son of the King (born 21 June 1971) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the king on recommendation of the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
National Council: 
  consists of a 60-member body, 50 appointed by House of Representatives
  and 10 by the King
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held on 12 May 1991 (next to be held May 1996); results
  - NCP 38%, CPN/UML 28%, NDP/Chand 6%, UPF 5%, NDP/Thapa 5%, Terai
  Rights Sadbhavana Party 4%, Rohit 2%, CPN (Democratic) 1%,
  independents 4%, other 7%; seats - (205 total) NCP 110, CPN/UML 69,
  UPF 9, Terai Rights Sadbhavana Party 6, NDP/Chand 3, Rohit 2, CPN
  (Democratic) 2, NDP/Thapa 1, independents 3; note - the new
  Constitution of 9 November 1990 gave Nepal a multiparty democracy
  system for the first time in 32 years
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Sarbochha Adalat) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Nepali Congress Party (NCP), president Krishna Prasad BHATTARAI, Prime
  Minister Girija Prasad KOIRALA, Supreme Leader Ganesh Man SINGH; The
  Conservative National Democratic Party (NDP/Thapa), Surya Bahadur
  THAPA; Communist Party of Nepal/United Marxist and Leninist (CPN/UML),
  Man Mohan ADHIKARI; Terai Rights Sadbhavana (Goodwill) Party, Gajendra
  Narayan SINGH; United People's Front (UPF), Lila Mani POKHREL; Nepal
  Workers and Peasants Party (NWPP), Narayan Man BIJUKCHHE; National
  Democratic Party/Chand (NDP/Chand), Lokendra Bahadur CHAND; Rohit
  Party, N. M. BIJUKCHHE; Communist Party of Nepal
  (Democratic-Manandhar), B. B. MANANDHAR
Other political or pressure groups: 
  numerous small, left-leaning student groups in the capital; several
  small, radical Nepalese antimonarchist groups
Member of: 
  AsDB, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM,
  SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
chancery: 
  2131 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 667-4550 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Sandra VOGELGESANG 
embassy: 
  Pani Pokhari, Kathmandu 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [977] (1) 411179 or 412718, 411613, 413890 
FAX: 
  [977] (1) 419963 
Flag: 
  red with a blue border around the unique shape of two overlapping
  right triangles; the smaller, upper triangle bears a white stylized
  moon and the larger, lower triangle bears a white 12-pointed sun

@Nepal, Economy

Overview: 
  Nepal is among the poorest and least developed countries in the world.
  Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy, providing a livelihood for
  over 90% of the population and accounting for 60% of GDP. Industrial
  activity is limited, mainly involving the processing of agricultural
  produce (jute, sugarcane, tobacco, and grain). Production of textiles
  and carpets has expanded recently and accounted for 85% of foreign
  exchange earnings in FY94. Apart from agricultural land and forests,
  exploitable natural resources are mica, hydropower, and tourism.
  Agricultural production in the late 1980s grew by about 5%, as
  compared with annual population growth of 2.6%. More than 40% of the
  population is undernourished. Since May 1991, the government has been
  encouraging trade and foreign investment, e.g., by eliminating
  business licenses and registration requirements in order to simplify
  domestic and foreign investment. The government also has been cutting
  public expenditures by reducing subsidies, privatizing state
  industries, and laying off civil servants. Prospects for foreign trade
  and investment in the 1990s remain poor, however, because of the small
  size of the economy, its technological backwardness, its remoteness,
  and susceptibility to natural disaster. Nepal experienced severe
  flooding in August 1993 which caused at least $50 million in damage to
  the country's infrastructure.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $20.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.9% (FY93)
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9% (September 1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  5%; underemployment estimated at 25%-40% (1987)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $457 million 
expenditures: 
  $725 million, including capital expenditures of $427 million (FY93
  est.)
Exports: 
  $369 million (f.o.b., FY93) but does not include unrecorded border
  trade with India
commodities: 
  carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute goods, grain
partners: 
  US, Germany, India, UK
Imports: 
  $789 million (c.i.f., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum products 20%, fertilizer 11%, machinery 10%
partners: 
  India, Singapore, Japan, Germany
External debt: 
  $2 billion (FY93 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6% (FY91 est.); accounts for 16% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  300,000 kW
production: 
  1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  50 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  small rice, jute, sugar, and oilseed mills; cigarette, textile,
  carpet, cement, and brick production; tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 60% of GDP and 93% of work force; farm products - rice,
  corn, wheat, sugarcane, root crops, milk, buffalo meat; not
  self-sufficient in food, particularly in drought years
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic and international drug
  markets; transit point for heroin from Southeast Asia to the West
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $304 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1980-89), $2.23
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $30 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $286 million 
Currency: 
  1 Nepalese rupee (NR) = 100 paisa
Exchange rates: 
  Nepalese rupees (NRs) per US$1 - 49.240 (January 1994), 48.607 (1993),
  42.742 (1992), 37.255 (1991), 29.370 (1990), 27.189 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  16 July - 15 July

@Nepal, Communications

Railroads: 
  52 km (1990), all 0.762-meter narrow gauge; all in Terai close to
  Indian border; 10 km from Raxaul to Birganj is government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  7,080 km 
paved: 
  2,898 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 1,660 km; seasonally motorable tracks 2,522 km
  (1990)
Airports: 
total: 
  37 
usable: 
  37 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  8 
Telecommunications: 
  poor telephone and telegraph service; fair radio communication and
  broadcast service; international radio communication service is poor;
  50,000 telephones (1990); broadcast stations - 88 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 1
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Nepal, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Nepalese Army, Royal Nepalese Army Air Service, Nepalese Police
  Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 5,003,661; fit for military service 2,598,507; reach
  military age (17) annually 241,405 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $34 million, 2% of GDP (FY91/92)


@Netherlands, 


@Netherlands, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, bordering the North Sea, between Belgium and Germany
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  37,330 sq km 
land area: 
  33,920 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,027 km, Belgium 450 km, Germany 577 km 
Coastline: 
  451 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; marine; cool summers and mild winters
Terrain: 
  mostly coastal lowland and reclaimed land (polders); some hills in
  southeast
Natural resources: 
  natural gas, petroleum, fertile soil 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  26% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  32% 
forest and woodland: 
  9% 
other: 
  32% 
Irrigated land: 
  5,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution in the form of heavy metals, organic compounds, and
  nutrients such as nitrates and phosphates; air pollution from vehicles
  and refining activities; acid rain
natural hazards: 
  the extensive system of dikes and dams, protects nearly one-half of
  the total area from being flooded
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  located at mouths of three major European rivers (Rhine, Maas or
  Meuse, Schelde)

@Netherlands, People

Population: 
  15,367,928 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.58% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.62 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.5 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.68 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.75 years 
male: 
  74.69 years 
female: 
  80.97 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.58 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Dutchman(men), Dutchwoman(women) 
adjective: 
  Dutch 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Dutch 96%, Moroccans, Turks, and other 4% (1988)
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 34%, Protestant 25%, Muslim 3%, other 2%, unaffiliated
  36% (1991)
Languages: 
  Dutch 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1979 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  6.7 million (1991)
by occupation: 
  services 50.1%, manufacturing and construction 28.2%, government
  15.9%, agriculture 5.8% (1986)

@Netherlands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of the Netherlands 
conventional short form: 
  Netherlands 
local long form: 
  Koninkrijk de Nederlanden 
local short form: 
  Nederland 
Digraph: 
  NL
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Amsterdam; The Hague is the seat of government
Administrative divisions: 
  12 provinces (provincien, singular - provincie); Drenthe, Flevoland,
  Friesland, Gelderland, Groningen, Limburg, Noord-Brabant,
  Noord-Holland, Overijssel, Utrecht, Zeeland, Zuid-Holland
Dependent areas: 
  Aruba, Netherlands Antilles 
Independence: 
  1579 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Queen's Day, 30 April (1938) 
Constitution: 
  17 February 1983
Legal system: 
  civil law system incorporating French penal theory; judicial review in
  the Supreme Court of legislation of lower order rather than Acts of
  the States General; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard (since 30 April 1980); Heir Apparent
  WILLEM-ALEXANDER, Prince of Orange, son of Queen Beatrix (born 27
  April 1967) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister RUDOLPHUS (Ruud) F. M. LUBBERS (since 4 November 1982);
  Vice Prime Minister Willem (Wim) KOK (since 2 November 1989) -
  resigned after 3 May 1994 parliamentary elections; no new government
  has been formed to date
cabinet: 
  Ministry of General Affairs; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral legislature (Staten Generaal)
First Chamber (Eerste Kamer): 
  elections last held on 9 June l991 (next to be held 9 June 1995);
  results - elected by the country's 12 provincial councils; seats - (75
  total) percent of seats by party NA
Second Chamber (Tweede Kamer): 
  elections last held on 3 May 1994 (next to be held in May 1999);
  results - PvdA 24.3%, CDA 22.3%, VVD 20.4%, D'66 16.5%, other 16.5%;
  seats - (150 total) PvdA 37, CDA 34, VVD 31, D'66 24, other 24
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (De Hoge Raad) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), Elco BRINKMAN; Labor (PvdA), Wim
  KOK; Liberal (VVD), Frits BOLKESTEIN; Democrats '66 (D'66), Hans van
  MIERLO; a host of minor parties
Other political or pressure groups: 
  large multinational firms; Federation of Netherlands Trade Union
  Movement (comprising Socialist and Catholic trade unions) and a
  Protestant trade union; Federation of Catholic and Protestant
  Employers Associations; the nondenominational Federation of
  Netherlands Enterprises; and Interchurch Peace Council (IKV)
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australia Group, Benelux, BIS, CCC, CE,
  CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, ESCAP, FAO, G-10,
  GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS,
  MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, PCA,
  UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNOMUR, UNPROFOR, UNTAC,
  UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Adriaan Pieter Roetert JACOBOVITS DE SZEGED 
chancery: 
  4200 Linnean Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 244-5300 
FAX: 
  (202) 362-3430 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Manila (Trust Territories of the
  Pacific Islands), New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Kirk Terry DORNBUSH 
embassy: 
  Lange Voorhout 102, 2514 EJ The Hague 
mailing address: 
  PSC 71, Box 1000, the Hague; APO AE 09715 
telephone: 
  [31] (70) 310-9209 
FAX: 
  [31] (70) 361-4688 
consulate(s) general: 
  Amsterdam 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and blue; similar to
  the flag of Luxembourg, which uses a lighter blue and is longer

@Netherlands, Economy

Overview: 
  This highly developed and affluent economy is based on private
  enterprise. The government makes its presence felt, however, through
  many regulations, permit requirements, and welfare programs affecting
  most aspects of economic activity. The trade and financial services
  sector contributes over 50% of GDP. Industrial activity provides about
  25% of GDP and is led by the food-processing, oil-refining, and
  metalworking industries. The highly mechanized agricultural sector
  employs only 5% of the labor force, but provides large surpluses for
  export and the domestic food-processing industry. Rising unemployment
  and a sizable budget deficit are currently the most serious economic
  problems. Many of the economic issues of the 1990s will reflect the
  course of European economic integration.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $262.8 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.2% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $17,200 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.5% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  9.1% (March 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $109.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $122.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $139 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  metal products, chemicals, processed food and tobacco, agricultural
  products
partners: 
  EC 77% (Germany 27%, Belgium-Luxembourg 15%, UK 10%), US 4% (1991)
Imports: 
  $130.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  raw materials and semifinished products, consumer goods,
  transportation equipment, crude oil, food products
partners: 
  EC 64% (Germany 26%, Belgium-Luxembourg 14%, UK 8%), US 8% (1991)
External debt: 
  $0 
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1.5% (1993 est.); accounts for 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  22,216,000 kW
production: 
  63.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,200 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  agroindustries, metal and engineering products, electrical machinery
  and equipment, chemicals, petroleum, fishing, construction,
  microelectronics
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4.6% of GDP; animal production predominates; crops -
  grains, potatoes, sugar beets, fruits, vegetables; shortages of grain,
  fats, and oils
Illicit drugs: 
  gateway for cocaine, heroin, and hashish entering Europe; European
  producer of illicit amphetamines and other synthetic drugs
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $19.4 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Netherlands guilder, gulden, or florin (f.) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Netherlands guilders, gulden, or florins (f.) per US$1 - 1.9508
  (January 1994), 1.8573 (1993), 1.7585 (1992), 1.8697 (1991), 1.8209
  (1990), 2.1207 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Netherlands, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,828 km 1.435-meter standard gauge operated by Netherlands Railways
  (NS) (includes 1,957 km electrified and 1,800 km double track)
Highways: 
total: 
  104,590 km 
paved: 
  92,525 km (including 2,185 km of expressway)
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 12,065 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  6,340 km, of which 35% is usable by craft of 1,000 metric ton capacity
  or larger
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 418 km; petroleum products 965 km; natural gas 10,230 km 
Ports: 
  coastal - Amsterdam, Delfzijl, Den Helder, Dordrecht, Eemshaven,
  Ijmuiden, Rotterdam, Scheveningen, Terneuzen, Vlissingen; inland - 29
  ports
Merchant marine: 
  324 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,507,112 GRT/3,208,838 DWT,
  bulk 3, cargo 180, chemical tanker 21, combination bulk 3, container
  32, liquefied gas 12, livestock carrier 1, multifunction large-load
  carrier 4, oil tanker 27, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 20,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 15, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 2
note: 
  many Dutch-owned ships are also registered on the captive Netherlands
  Antilles register
Airports: 
total: 
  28 
usable: 
  28 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  19 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  7 
Telecommunications: 
  highly developed, well maintained, and integrated; extensive redundant
  system of multiconductor cables, supplemented by microwave radio relay
  microwave links; 9,418,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 3 (3
  relays) AM, 12 (39 repeaters) FM, 8 (7 repeaters) TV; 5 submarine
  cables; 1 communication satellite earth station operating in INTELSAT
  (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Atlantic Ocean antenna) and EUTELSAT systems;
  nationwide mobile phone system

@Netherlands, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Netherlands Army, Royal Netherlands Navy (including Naval Air
  Service and Marine Corps), Royal Netherlands Air Force, Royal
  Constabulary 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,180,745; fit for military service 3,667,212; reach
  military age (20) annually 98,479 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $6.8 billion, 2.3% of GDP (1993)


@Netherlands Antilles

Header
Affiliation: 
  (part of the Dutch realm) 

@Netherlands Antilles, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, two island groups - Curacao and Bonaire in the southern
  Caribbean Sea are about 70 km north of Venezuela near Aruba and the
  rest of the country is about 800 km to the northeast about one-third
  of the way between Antigua and Barbuda and Puerto Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  960 sq km 
land area: 
  960 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 5.5 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint Maarten
  (Dutch part of the island of Saint Martin)
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  364 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  12 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; ameliorated by northeast trade winds
Terrain: 
  generally hilly, volcanic interiors
Natural resources: 
  phosphates (Curacao only), salt (Bonaire only) 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  92% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  Curacao and Bonaire are south of Caribbean hurricane belt, so rarely
  threatened; Sint Maarten, Saba, and Sint Eustatius are subject to
  hurricanes from July to October
international agreements: 
  party to - Whaling

@Netherlands Antilles, People

Population: 
  185,790 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.47% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.62 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.5 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.46 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  9.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.32 years 
male: 
  74.1 years 
female: 
  78.66 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.96 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Netherlands Antillean(s) 
adjective: 
  Netherlands Antillean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mixed African 85%, Carib Indian, European, Latin, Oriental 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Seventh-Day Adventist 
Languages: 
  Dutch (official), Papiamento a Spanish-Portuguese-Dutch-English
  dialect predominates, English widely spoken, Spanish 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1981)
total population: 
  94% 
male: 
  94% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  89,000 
by occupation: 
  government 65%, industry and commerce 28% (1983)

@Netherlands Antilles, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Netherlands Antilles 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Nederlandse Antillen 
Digraph: 
  NA
Type: 
  part of the Dutch realm; full autonomy in internal affairs granted in
  1954
Capital: 
  Willemstad 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (part of the Dutch realm)
Independence: 
  none (part of the Dutch realm)
National holiday: 
  Queen's Day, 30 April (1938) 
Constitution: 
  29 December 1954, Statute of the Realm of the Netherlands, as amended
Legal system: 
  based on Dutch civil law system, with some English common law
  influence
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard (since 30 April 1980), represented by
  Governor General Jaime SALEH (since NA October 1989) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Miguel POURIER (since 25 February 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed with the advice and approval of the
  unicameral legislature
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Staten: 
  elections last held on 25 February 1994 (next to be held March 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (23 total) PAR 8, PNP
  3, SPA 2, PDB 2, UPB 1, MAN 2, DP 1, WIPM 1, DP-St. E 1, DP-St. M 1,
  Nos Patria 1
note: 
  the government of Miguel POURIER is a coalition of several parties
Judicial branch: 
  Joint High Court of Justice 
Political parties and leaders: 
  political parties are indigenous to each island
Bonaire: 
  Patriotic Union of Bonaire (UPB), Rudy ELLIS; Democratic Party of
  Bonaire (PDB), Franklin CRESTIAN
Curacao: 
  Antillean Restructuring Party (PAR), Miguel POURIER; National People's
  Party (PNP), Maria LIBERIA-PETERS; New Antilles Movement (MAN),
  Domenico Felip Don MARTINA; Workers' Liberation Front (FOL), Wilson
  (Papa) GODETT; Socialist Independent (SI), George HUECK and Nelson
  MONTE; Democratic Party of Curacao (DP), Augustin DIAZ; Nos Patria,
  Chin BEHILIA
Saba: 
  Windward Islands People's Movement (WIPM Saba), Will JOHNSON; Saba
  Democratic Labor Movement, Vernon HASSELL; Saba Unity Party, Carmen
  SIMMONDS
Sint Eustatius: 
  Democratic Party of Sint Eustatius (DP-St.E), K. Van PUTTEN; Windward
  Islands People's Movement (WIPM); St. Eustatius Alliance (SEA), Ralph
  BERKEL
Sint Maarten: 
  Democratic Party of Sint Maarten (DP-St.M), Claude WATHEY; Patriotic
  Movement of Sint Maarten (SPA), Vance JAMES
Member of: 
  CARICOM (observer), ECLAC (associate), ICFTU, INTERPOL, IOC, UNESCO
  (associate), UPU, WMO, WTO (associate) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (self-governing part of the Netherlands)
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Consul General Bernard J. WOERZ 
consulate general: 
  Saint Anna Boulevard 19, Willemstad, Curacao 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 158, Willemstad, Curacao 
telephone: 
  [599] (9) 613066 
FAX: 
  [599] (9) 616489 
Flag: 
  white with a horizontal blue stripe in the center superimposed on a
  vertical red band also centered; five white five-pointed stars are
  arranged in an oval pattern in the center of the blue band; the five
  stars represent the five main islands of Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint
  Eustatius, and Sint Maarten

@Netherlands Antilles, Economy

Overview: 
  Tourism, petroleum refining, and offshore finance are the mainstays of
  the economy. The islands enjoy a high per capita income and a
  well-developed infrastructure as compared with other countries in the
  region. Unlike many Latin American countries, the Netherlands Antilles
  has avoided large international debt. Almost all consumer and capital
  goods are imported, with Venezuela and the US being the major
  suppliers.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $1.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $9,700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  16.4% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $209 million 
expenditures: 
  $232 million, including capital expenditures of $8 million (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $240 million (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  petroleum products 98%
partners: 
  US 39%, Brazil 9%, Colombia 6%
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  crude petroleum 64%, food, manufactures
partners: 
  Venezuela 26%, US 18%, Colombia 6%, Netherlands 6%, Japan 5%
External debt: 
  $701 million (December 1987)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  125,000 kW
production: 
  365 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,980 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism (Curacao and Sint Maarten), petroleum refining (Curacao),
  petroleum transshipment facilities (Curacao and Bonaire), light
  manufacturing (Curacao)
Agriculture: 
  hampered by poor soils and scarcity of water; chief products - aloes,
  sorghum, peanuts, fresh vegetables, tropical fruit; not
  self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  money-laundering center; transshipment point for South American
  cocaine and marijuana bound for the US and Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $513 million 
Currency: 
  1 Netherlands Antillean guilder, gulden, or florin (NAf.) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Netherlands Antillean guilders, gulden, or florins (NAf.) per US$1 -
  1.79 (fixed rate since 1989; 1.80 fixed rate 1971-88)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Netherlands Antilles, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  950 km 
paved: 
  300 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, earth 650 km 
Ports: 
  Willemstad, Philipsburg, Kralendijk
Merchant marine: 
  113 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 966,797 GRT/1,251,871 DWT, bulk
  1, cargo 43, chemical tanker 7, combination ore/oil 1, container 3,
  liquefied gas 5, multifunction large-load carrier 18, oil tanker 1,
  passenger 4, refrigerated cargo 23, roll-on/roll-off cargo 7 
note: 
  all but a few are foreign owned, mostly in the Netherlands
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  generally adequate facilities; extensive interisland microwave radio
  relay links; broadcast stations - 9 AM, 4 FM, 1 TV; 2 submarine
  cables; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@Netherlands Antilles, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Netherlands Navy, Marine Corps, Royal Netherlands Air Force,
  National Guard, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 48,866; fit for military service 27,421; reach
  military age (20) annually 1,595 (1994 est.)
Note: 
  defense is responsibility of the Netherlands


@New Caledonia

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas territory of France) 

@New Caledonia, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Melanesia, in the South Pacific Ocean, 1,750 km east of
  Australia
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  19,060 sq km 
land area: 
  18,760 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  2,254 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; modified by southeast trade winds; hot, humid
Terrain: 
  coastal plains with interior mountains
Natural resources: 
  nickel, chrome, iron, cobalt, manganese, silver, gold, lead, copper 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  14% 
forest and woodland: 
  51% 
other: 
  35% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  typhoons most frequent from November to March
international agreements: 
  NA 

@New Caledonia, People

Population: 
  181,309 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.79% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  22.39 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.96 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  15.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.62 years 
male: 
  70.32 years 
female: 
  77.09 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.62 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  New Caledonian(s) 
adjective: 
  New Caledonian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Melanesian 42.5%, European 37.1%, Wallisian 8.4%, Polynesian 3.8%,
  Indonesian 3.6%, Vietnamese 1.6%, other 3% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 60%, Protestant 30%, other 10% 
Languages: 
  French, 28 Melanesian-Polynesian dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1976)
total population: 
  91% 
male: 
  91% 
female: 
  90% 
Labor force: 
  50,469 foreign workers for plantations and mines from Wallis and
  Futuna, Vanuatu, and French Polynesia (1980 est.)
by occupation: 
  NA

@New Caledonia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of New Caledonia and Dependencies 
conventional short form: 
  New Caledonia 
local long form: 
  Territoire des Nouvelle-Caledonie et Dependances 
local short form: 
  Nouvelle-Caledonie 
Digraph: 
  NC
Type: 
  overseas territory of France since 1956
Capital: 
  Noumea 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas territory of France); there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are 3 provinces named Iles Loyaute, Nord, and Sud
Independence: 
  none (overseas territory of France; a referendum on independence will
  be held in 1998)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  the 1988 Matignon Accords grant substantial autonomy to the islands;
  formerly under French law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  High Commissioner and President of the Council of Government Alain
  CHRISTNACHT (since 15 January 1991; appointed by the French Ministry
  of the Interior); President of the Territorial Congress Simon
  LOUECKHOTE (since 26 June 1989) 
cabinet: 
  Consultative Committee  
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Territorial Assembly: 
  elections last held 11 June 1989 (next to be held 1993); results -
  RPCR 44.5%, FLNKS 28.5%, FN 7%, CD 5%, UO 4%, other 11%; seats - (54
  total) RPCR 27, FLNKS 19, FN 3, other 5; note - election boycotted by
  FULK
French Senate: 
  elections last held 27 September 1992 (next to be held September
  2001); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) RPCR 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 March 1993 (next to be held 21 and 28 March
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (2 total) RPCR 2
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  white-dominated Rassemblement pour la Caledonie dans la Republique
  (RPCR), conservative, Jacques LAFLEUR - affiliated to France's
  Rassemblement pour la Republique (RPR); Melanesian proindependence
  Kanaka Socialist National Liberation Front (FLNKS), Paul NEAOUTYINE;
  Melanesian moderate Kanak Socialist Liberation (LKS), Nidoish
  NAISSELINE; National Front (FN), extreme right, Guy GEORGE; Caledonie
  Demain (CD), right-wing, Bernard MARANT; Union Oceanienne (UO),
  conservative, Michel HEMA; Front Uni de Liberation Kanak (FULK),
  proindependence, Clarence UREGEI; Union Caledonian (UC), Francois
  BURCK
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), FZ, ICFTU, SPC, WFTU, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@New Caledonia, Economy

Overview: 
  New Caledonia has more than 25% of the world's known nickel resources.
  In recent years the economy has suffered because of depressed
  international demand for nickel, the principal source of export
  earnings. Only a negligible amount of the land is suitable for
  cultivation, and food accounts for about 25% of imports.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $1 billion (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.4% (1988)
National product per capita: 
  $6,000 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.4% (1990)
Unemployment rate: 
  16% (1989)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $224 million 
expenditures: 
  $211 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1985 est.)
Exports: 
  $671 million (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: 
  nickel metal 87%, nickel ore
partners: 
  France 32%, Japan 23.5%, US 3.6%
Imports: 
  $764 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: 
  foods, fuels, minerals, machines, electrical equipment
partners: 
  France 44.0%, US 10%, Australia 9%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  400,000 kW
production: 
  2.2 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  12,790 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  nickel mining and smelting
Agriculture: 
  large areas devoted to cattle grazing; coffee, corn, wheat,
  vegetables; 60% self-sufficient in beef
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cannabis cultivation is becoming a principal source of income
  for some families
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $4.185 billion 
Currency: 
  1 CFP franc (CFPF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Comptoirs Francais duPacifique francs (CFPF) per US$1 - 107.63
  (January 1994), 102.96 (1993), 96.24 (1992), 102.57 (1991), 99.00
  (1990), 115.99 (1989); note - linked at the rate of 18.18 to the
  French franc
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@New Caledonia, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  6,340 km 
paved: 
  634 km 
unpaved: 
  5,706 km (1987)
Ports: 
  Noumea, Nepoui, Poro, Thio
Airports: 
total: 
  30 
usable: 
  28 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  32,578 telephones (1987); broadcast stations - 5 AM, 3 FM, 7 TV; 1
  Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@New Caledonia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Gendarmerie, Police Force 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@New Zealand, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Oceania, southeast of Australia in the South Pacific
  Ocean
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  268,680 sq km 
land area: 
  268,670 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about the size of Colorado
note: 
  includes Antipodes Islands, Auckland Islands, Bounty Islands, Campbell
  Island, Chatham Islands, and Kermadec Islands
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  15,134 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  territorial claim in Antarctica (Ross Dependency)
Climate: 
  temperate with sharp regional contrasts
Terrain: 
  predominately mountainous with some large coastal plains
Natural resources: 
  natural gas, iron ore, sand, coal, timber, hydropower, gold, limestone
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  53% 
forest and woodland: 
  38% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,800 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; native flora and fauna hard-hit by
  species introduced from outside
natural hazards: 
  earthquakes are common, though usually not severe
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed,
  but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  about 80% of the population lives in cities

@New Zealand, People

Population: 
  3,388,737 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.57% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.52 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.06 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.38 years 
male: 
  72.76 years 
female: 
  80.18 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.03 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  New Zealander(s) 
adjective: 
  New Zealand 
Ethnic divisions: 
  European 88%, Maori 8.9%, Pacific Islander 2.9%, other 0.2% 
Religions: 
  Anglican 24%, Presbyterian 18%, Roman Catholic 15%, Methodist 5%,
  Baptist 2%, other Protestant 3%, unspecified or none 9% (1986)
Languages: 
  English (official), Maori 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1,603,500 (June 1991)
by occupation: 
  services 67.4%, manufacturing 19.8%, primary production 9.3% (1987)

@New Zealand, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  New Zealand 
Abbreviation: 
  NZ 
Digraph: 
  NZ
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Wellington 
Administrative divisions: 
  93 counties, 9 districts*, and 3 town districts**; Akaroa, Amuri,
  Ashburton, Bay of Islands, Bruce, Buller, Chatham Islands, Cheviot,
  Clifton, Clutha, Cook, Dannevirke, Egmont, Eketahuna, Ellesmere,
  Eltham, Eyre, Featherston, Franklin, Golden Bay, Great Barrier Island,
  Grey, Hauraki Plains, Hawera*, Hawke's Bay, Heathcote, Hikurangi**,
  Hobson, Hokianga, Horowhenua, Hurunui, Hutt, Inangahua, Inglewood,
  Kaikoura, Kairanga, Kiwitea, Lake, Mackenzie, Malvern, Manaia**,
  Manawatu, Mangonui, Maniototo, Marlborough, Masterton, Matamata, Mount
  Herbert, Ohinemuri, Opotiki, Oroua, Otamatea, Otorohanga*, Oxford,
  Pahiatua, Paparua, Patea, Piako, Pohangina, Raglan, Rangiora*,
  Rangitikei, Rodney, Rotorua*, Runanga, Saint Kilda, Silverpeaks,
  Southland, Stewart Island, Stratford, Strathallan, Taranaki,
  Taumarunui, Taupo, Tauranga, Thames-Coromandel*, Tuapeka, Vincent,
  Waiapu, Waiheke, Waihemo, Waikato, Waikohu, Waimairi, Waimarino,
  Waimate, Waimate West, Waimea, Waipa, Waipawa*, Waipukurau*, Wairarapa
  South, Wairewa, Wairoa, Waitaki, Waitomo*, Waitotara, Wallace,
  Wanganui, Waverley**, Westland, Whakatane*, Whangarei, Whangaroa,
  Woodville
Dependent areas: 
  Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau 
Independence: 
  26 September 1907 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of Waitangi established
  British sovereignty)
Constitution: 
  no formal, written constitution; consists of various documents,
  including certain acts of the UK and New Zealand Parliaments;
  Constitution Act 1986 was to have come into force 1 January 1987, but
  has not been enacted
Legal system: 
  based on English law, with special land legislation and land courts
  for Maoris; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Dame Catherine TIZARD (since 12 December 1990) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister James BOLGER (since 29 October 1990); Deputy Prime
  Minister Donald McKINNON (since 2 November 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; appointed by the governor general on recommendation
  of the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Representatives: 
  (commonly called Parliament) elections last held on 6 November 1993
  (next to be held NA November 1996); results - NP 35.2%, NZLP 34.7%,
  Alliance 18.3%, New Zealand First 8.3%; seats - (99 total) NP 50, NZLP
  45, Alliance 2, New Zealand First Party 2
Judicial branch: 
  High Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Party (NP; government), James BOLGER; New Zealand Labor Party
  (NZLP; opposition), Helen CLARK; Alliance, Jim ANDERTON; Democratic
  Party, Dick RYAN; New Zealand Liberal Party, Hanmish MACINTYRE and
  Gilbert MYLES; Green Party, no official leader; Mana Motuhake, Martin
  RATA; Socialist Unity Party (SUP; pro-Soviet), Kenneth DOUGLAS; New
  Zealand First, Winston PETERS
note: 
  the New Labor, Democratic, and Mana Motuhake parties formed a
  coalition called the Alliance Party, Jim ANDERTON, president, in
  September 1991; the Green Party joined the coalition in May 1992
Member of: 
  ANZUS (US suspended security obligations to NZ on 11 August 1986),
  APEC, AsDB, Australia Group, C, CCC, CP, COCOM (cooperating), EBRD,
  ESCAP, FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, MTCR, NAM (guest), OECD, PCA, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN, UNAVEM
  II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Lionel John WOOD 
chancery: 
  37 Observatory Circle NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 328-4800 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Josiah BEEMAN 
embassy: 
  29 Fitzherbert Terrace, Thorndon, Wellington 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1190, Wellington; PSC 467, Box 1, FPO AP 96531-1001 
telephone: 
  [64] (4) 472-2068 
FAX: 
  [64] (4) 472-3537 
consulate(s) general: 
  Auckland 
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant with
  four red five-pointed stars edged in white centered in the outer half
  of the flag; the stars represent the Southern Cross constellation

@New Zealand, Economy

Overview: 
  Since 1984 the government has been reorienting an agrarian economy
  dependent on a guaranteed British market to a more industrialized,
  open free market economy that can compete on the global scene. The
  government has hoped that dynamic growth would boost real incomes,
  broaden and deepen the technological capabilities of the industrial
  sector, reduce inflationary pressures, and permit the expansion of
  welfare benefits. The results have been mixed: inflation is down from
  double-digit levels, but growth was sluggish in 1988-91. In 1992-93,
  growth picked up to 3% annually, a sign that the new economic approach
  is beginning to pay off. Business confidence has strengthened, and the
  inflation remains among the lowest in the industrial world.
  Unemployment, down from 11% in 1991, remains unacceptably high at 9%.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $53 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $15,700 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  9.1% (September 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
note: 
  deficit $345 million (October 1993)
Exports: 
  $10.3 billion (FY93)
commodities: 
  wool, lamb, mutton, beef, fruit, fish, cheese, manufactures,
  chemicals, forestry products
partners: 
  Australia 18.9%, Japan 15.1%, US 12.5%, South Korea 4.1%
Imports: 
  $9.4 billion (FY93)
commodities: 
  petroleum, consumer goods, motor vehicles, industrial equipment
partners: 
  Australia 21.1%, US 19.6%, Japan 14.7%, UK 6.3%, Germany 4.2%
External debt: 
  $35.3 billion (March 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.9% (1990); accounts for about 20% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  8,000,000 kW
production: 
  31 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  9,250 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, wood and paper products, textiles, machinery,
  transportation equipment, banking and insurance, tourism, mining
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 9% of GDP and about 10% of the work force;
  livestock predominates - wool, meat, dairy products all export
  earners; crops - wheat, barley, potatoes, pulses, fruits, vegetables;
  surplus producer of farm products; fish catch reached a record 503,000
  metric tons in 1988
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $526 million 
Currency: 
  1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.7771 (January 1994), 1.8495
  (1993), 1.8584 (1992), 1.7265 (1991), 1.6750 (1990), 1.6711 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@New Zealand, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,716 km total; all 1.067-meter gauge; 274 km double track; 113 km
  electrified; over 99% government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  92,648 km 
paved: 
  49,547 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 43,101 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,609 km; of little importance to transportation
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 160 km; natural gas 1,000 km; condensate (liquified
  petroleum gas - LPG) 150 km 
Ports: 
  Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Wellington, Tauranga
Merchant marine: 
  18 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 165,514 GRT/218,699 DWT, bulk 6,
  cargo 2, liquefied gas 1, oil tanker 3, railcar carrier 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 5 
Airports: 
total: 
  108 
usable: 
  108 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  39 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  39 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent international and domestic systems; 2,110,000 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 64 AM, 2 FM, 14 TV; submarine cables extend to
  Australia and Fiji; 2 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@New Zealand, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  New Zealand Army, Royal New Zealand Navy, Royal New Zealand Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 880,576; fit for military service 741,629; reach
  military age (20) annually 28,242 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $792 million, 2% of GDP (FY90/91)


@Nicaragua, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, between Costa Rica and Honduras
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America 
Area: 
total area: 
  129,494 sq km 
land area: 
  120,254 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New York State
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,231 km, Costa Rica 309 km, Honduras 922 km 
Coastline: 
  910 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  25-nm security zone (status of claim uncertain)
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  territorial disputes with Colombia over the Archipelago de San Andres
  y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank; International Court of Justice
  (ICJ) referred the maritime boundary question in the Golfo de Fonseca
  to an earlier agreement in this century and advised that some
  tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua
  likely would be required
Climate: 
  tropical in lowlands, cooler in highlands
Terrain: 
  extensive Atlantic coastal plains rising to central interior
  mountains; narrow Pacific coastal plain interrupted by volcanoes
Natural resources: 
  gold, silver, copper, tungsten, lead, zinc, timber, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  9% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  43% 
forest and woodland: 
  35% 
other: 
  12% 
Irrigated land: 
  850 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution
natural hazards: 
  subject to destructive earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, and
  occasionally severe hurricanes
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea

@Nicaragua, People

Population: 
  4,096,689 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.68% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  34.66 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.69 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.22 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  52.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  64.02 years 
male: 
  61.18 years 
female: 
  66.96 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Nicaraguan(s) 
adjective: 
  Nicaraguan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo 69%, white 17%, black 9%, Indian 5% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95%, Protestant 5% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official)
note: 
  English- and Indian-speaking minorities on Atlantic coast
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1971)
total population: 
  57% 
male: 
  57% 
female: 
  57% 
Labor force: 
  1.086 million 
by occupation: 
  services 43%, agriculture 44%, industry 13% (1986)

@Nicaragua, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Nicaragua 
conventional short form: 
  Nicaragua 
local long form: 
  Republica de Nicaragua 
local short form: 
  Nicaragua 
Digraph: 
  NU
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Managua 
Administrative divisions: 
  17 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Boaco,
  Carazo, Chinandega, Chontales, Esteli, Granada, Jinotega, Leon,
  Madriz, Managua, Masaya, Matagalpa, North Atlantic Coast Autonomous
  Zone (RAAN), Nueva Segovia, Rio San Juan, Rivas, South Atlantic Coast
  Autonomous Zone (RAAS)
Independence: 
  15 September 1821 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 15 September (1821) 
Constitution: 
  9 January 1987
Legal system: 
  civil law system; Supreme Court may review administrative acts
Suffrage: 
  16 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Violeta Barrios de CHAMORRO (since 25 April 1990); Vice
  President Virgilio GODOY Reyes (since 25 April 1990); election last
  held on 25 February 1990 (next to be held November 1996); results -
  Violeta Barrios de CHAMORRO (UNO) 54.7%, Daniel ORTEGA Saavedra (FSLN)
  40.8%, other 4.5%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Asamblea Nacional): 
  elections last held on 25 February 1990 (next to be held November
  1996); results - UNO 53.9%, FSLN 40.8%, PSC 1.6%, MUR 1.0%; seats -
  (92 total) UNO 41, FSLN 39, "Centrist" (Dissident UNO) 12
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Corte Suprema) 
Political parties and leaders: 
ruling coalition: 
  National Opposition Union (UNO) is a 10-party alliance - moderate
  parties: National Conservative Party (PNC), Silviano MATAMOROS Lacayo,
  president; Liberal Constitutionalist Party (PLC), Jose Ernesto
  SOMARRIBA, Arnold ALEMAN; Christian Democratic Union (UDC), Luis
  Humberto GUZMAN, Agustin JARQUIN, Azucena FERREY, Roger MIRANDA,
  Francisco MAYORGA; National Democratic Movement (MDN), Roberto URROZ;
  National Action Party (PAN), Duilio BALTODANO; UNO - hardline parties:
  Independent Liberal Party (PLI), Wilfredo NAVARRO,Virgilio GODOY
  Reyes; Social Democratic Party (PSD), Guillermo POTOY, Alfredo CESAR
  Aguirre, secretary general; Conservative Popular Alliance Party
  (PAPC), Myriam ARGUELLO; Communist Party of Nicaragua (PCdeN), Eli
  ALTIMIRANO Perez; Neo-Liberal Party (PALI), Adolfo GARCIA Esquivel
opposition parties: 
  Sandinista National Liberation Front (FSLN), Daniel ORTEGA; Central
  American Unionist Party (PUCA), Blanca ROJAS; Democratic Conservative
  Party of Nicaragua (PCDN), Jose BRENES; Liberal Party of National
  Unity (PLUIN), Eduardo CORONADO; Movement of Revolutionary Unity
  (MUR), Francisco SAMPER; Social Christian Party (PSC), Erick RAMIREZ;
  Revolutionary Workers' Party (PRT), Bonifacio MIRANDA; Social
  Conservative Party (PSOC), Fernando AGUERRO; Popular Action Movement -
  Marxist-Leninist (MAP-ML), Isidro TELLEZ; Popular Social Christian
  Party (PPSC), Mauricio DIAZ
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Workers Front (FNT) is a Sandinista umbrella group of eight
  labor unions: Sandinista Workers' Central (CST); Farm Workers
  Association (ATC); Health Workers Federation (FETASALUD); National
  Union of Employees (UNE); National Association of Educators of
  Nicaragua (ANDEN); Union of Journalists of Nicaragua (UPN); Heroes and
  Martyrs Confederation of Professional Associations (CONAPRO); and the
  National Union of Farmers and Ranchers (UNAG); Permanent Congress of
  Workers (CPT) is an umbrella group of four non-Sandinista labor
  unions: Confederation of Labor Unification (CUS); Autonomous
  Nicaraguan Workers' Central (CTN-A); Independent General Confederation
  of Labor (CGT-I); and Labor Action and Unity Central (CAUS);
  Nicaraguan Workers' Central (CTN) is an independent labor union;
  Superior Council of Private Enterprise (COSEP) is a confederation of
  business groups 
Member of: 
  BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU,
  LAES, LAIA (observer), LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Roberto MAYORGA Cortes 
chancery: 
  1627 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-6570 
consulate(s) general: 
  Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John MAISTO 
embassy: 
  Kilometer 4.5 Carretera Sur., Managua 
mailing address: 
  APO AA 34021 
telephone: 
  [505] (2) 666010 or 666013, 666015 through 18, 666026, 666027, 666032
  through 34 
FAX: 
  [505] (2) 666046 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and blue with the
  national coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of arms
  features a triangle encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on
  the top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom; similar to the flag of El
  Salvador, which features a round emblem encircled by the words
  REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL centered in the white
  band; also similar to the flag of Honduras, which has five blue stars
  arranged in an X pattern centered in the white band

@Nicaragua, Economy

Overview: 
  Since March 1991, when President CHAMORRO began an ambitious economic
  stabilization program, Nicaragua has had considerable success in
  reducing inflation and obtaining substantial economic aid from abroad.
  Annual inflation fell from more than 750% in 1991 to less than 5% in
  1992. Inflation rose again to an estimated 20% in 1993, although this
  increase was due almost entirely to a large currency devaluation in
  January. As of early 1994, the government was close to finalizing an
  enhanced structural adjustment facility with the IMF, after the
  previous standby facility expired in early 1993. Despite these
  successes, achieving overall economic growth in an economy scarred by
  misguided economic values and civil war during the 1980s has proved
  elusive. Economic growth was flat in 1992 and slightly negative in
  1993. Nicaragua's per capita foreign debt is one of the highest in the
  world; nonetheless, as of late 1993, Nicaragua was current on its
  post-1988 debt as well as on payments to the international financial
  institutions. Definition of property rights remains a problem;
  ownership disputes over large tracts of land, businesses, and homes
  confiscated by the previous government have yet to be resolved.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent  - $6.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  20% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  13%; underemployment 50% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $375 million (1992)
expenditures: 
  $410 million (1992), including capital expenditures of $115 million
  (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $228 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, cotton, coffee, chemicals
partners: 
  EC 26%, US 26%, Japan, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Mexico (1992)
Imports: 
  $907 million (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  petroleum, food, chemicals, machinery, clothing
partners: 
  US 26%, Venezuela, Costa Rica, EC, Guatemala (1992)
External debt: 
  $10.5 billion ( 1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for 20-25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  434,000 kW
production: 
  1.118 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  290 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, chemicals, metal products, textiles, clothing,
  petroleum refining and distribution, beverages, footwear
Agriculture: 
  crops account for about 15% of GDP; export crops - coffee, bananas,
  sugarcane, cotton; food crops - rice, corn, cassava, citrus fruit,
  beans; also produces a variety of animal products - beef, veal, pork,
  poultry, dairy products; normally self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for cocaine destined for the US
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-92), $620 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $1.381 billion 
Currency: 
  1 gold cordoba (C$) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  gold cordobas (C$) per US$1 - 6 (10 January 1993), 5 (1992); note -
  gold cordoba replaced cordoba as Nicaragua's currency in 1991
  (exchange rate of old cordoba had reached per US$1 - 25,000,000 by
  March 1992)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Nicaragua, Communications

Railroads: 
  373 km 1.067-meter narrow gauge, government owned; majority of system
  not operating; 3 km 1.435-meter gauge line at Puerto Cabezas (does not
  connect with mainline)
Highways: 
total: 
  25,930 km 
paved: 
  4,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 2,170 km; graded earth 5,425 km; unimproved
  earth 14,335 km 
Pan-American highway: 
  368.5 km (not in total)
Inland waterways: 
  2,220 km, including 2 large lakes
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 56 km 
Ports: 
  Corinto, El Bluff, Puerto Cabezas, Puerto Sandino, Rama
Merchant marine: 
  2 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,161 GRT/2,500 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  208 
usable: 
  149 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  11 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  13 
Telecommunications: 
  low-capacity radio relay and wire system being expanded; connection
  into Central American Microwave System; 60,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 45 AM, no FM, 7 TV, 3 shortwave; earth stations - 1
  Intersputnik and 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT

@Nicaragua, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 946,177; fit for military service 582,669; reach
  military age (18) annually 45,555 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $43.0 million, 1.6% of GDP (1992)


@Niger, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, between Algeria and Nigeria
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1.267 million sq km 
land area: 
  1,266,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,697 km, Algeria 956 km, Benin 266 km, Burkina 628 km, Chad
  1,175 km, Libya 354 km, Mali 821 km, Nigeria 1,497 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in northern Niger; demarcation of
  international boundaries in Lake Chad, the lack of which has led to
  border incidents in the past, is completed and awaiting ratification
  by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria; Burkina and Mali are proceeding
  with boundary demarcation, including the tripoint with Niger
Climate: 
  desert; mostly hot, dry, dusty; tropical in extreme south
Terrain: 
  predominately desert plains and sand dunes; flat to rolling plains in
  south; hills in north
Natural resources: 
  uranium, coal, iron ore, tin, phosphates 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  2% 
other: 
  88% 
Irrigated land: 
  320 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  overgrazing; soil erosion; deforestation; desertification; wildlife
  populations (such as elephant, hippopotamus, and lion) threatened
  because of poaching and habitat destruction
natural hazards: 
  recurrent droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked

@Niger, People

Population: 
  8,971,605 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.36% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  54.95 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  21.32 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  111 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  44.61 years 
male: 
  43.01 years 
female: 
  46.26 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  7.35 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Nigerien(s) 
adjective: 
  Nigerien 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Hausa 56%, Djerma 22%, Fula 8.5%, Tuareg 8%, Beri Beri (Kanouri) 4.3%,
  Arab, Toubou, and Gourmantche 1.2%, about 4,000 French expatriates
Religions: 
  Muslim 80%, remainder indigenous beliefs and Christians 
Languages: 
  French (official), Hausa, Djerma 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  28% 
male: 
  40% 
female: 
  17% 
Labor force: 
  2.5 million wage earners (1982)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 90%, industry and commerce 6%, government 4%
note: 
  51% of population of working age (1985)

@Niger, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Niger 
conventional short form: 
  Niger 
local long form: 
  Republique du Niger 
local short form: 
  Niger 
Digraph: 
  NG
Type: 
  republic
Capital: 
  Niamey
Administrative divisions: 
  7 departments (departements, singular - departement); Agadez, Diffa,
  Dosso, Maradi, Niamey, Tahoua, Zinder
Independence: 
  3 August 1960 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Republic Day, 18 December (1958) 
Constitution: 
  approved by national referendum 16 December 1992; promulgated January
  1993
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and customary law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Mahamane OUSMANE (since 16 April  1993)  
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Mahamadou ISSOUFOU (since 17 April 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president on recommendation of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elected by proportional representation for 5 year terms; elections
  last held 14 February 1993 (next election NA 1998); seats - (83 total)
  MNSD 29, CDS 22, PNDS 13, ANDP-Z 11, UPDP 2, PPN/RDA 2, UDFP 2, PSDN
  1, UDPS 1
Judicial branch: 
  State Court (Cour d'Etat), Court of Appeal (Cour d'Apel) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Movement of the Development Society (MNSD-NASSARA), Kada
  LABO, General Secretary; Democratic and Social Convention - Rahama
  (CDS- Rahama), Mahamane OUSMANE; Nigerien Party for Democracy and
  Socialism (PNDS), Mahamadou ISSOUFOU; Nigerien Alliance for Democracy
  and Progress - Zamanlahia (ANDP-Z), Moumouni Adamou DJERMAKOYE; Union
  of Patriots, Democrats, and Progressives (UPDP), Andre SALIFOU; Niger
  Progressive Party - African Democratic Rally (PPN-RDA), Harou KOUKA;
  Niger Social Democrat Party (PADN), Malam Adji WAZIRI; Union for
  Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS), Akoli DAOUEL
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Adamou SEYDOU 
chancery: 
  2204 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-4224 through 4227 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John DAVISON  
embassy: 
  Rue Des Ambassades, Niamey 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 11201, Niamey 
telephone: 
  [227] 72-26-61 through 64 
FAX: 
  [227] 73-31-67 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and green with a
  small orange disk (representing the sun) centered in the white band;
  similar to the flag of India, which has a blue spoked wheel centered
  in the white band

@Niger, Economy

Overview: 
  Niger's economy is centered on subsistence agriculture, animal
  husbandry, and re-export trade, and increasingly less on uranium, its
  major export throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Uranium revenues dropped
  by almost 50% between 1983 and 1990. Terms of trade with Nigeria,
  Niger's largest regional trade partner, have improved dramatically
  since the 50% devaluation of the African franc in January 1994; this
  devaluation boosted exports of livestock, peas, onions, and the
  products of Niger's small cotton industry. The government relies on
  bilateral and multilateral aid for operating expenses and public
  investment, and is strongly induced to adhere to structural adjustment
  programs designed by the IMF and the World Bank.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $5.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.9% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $650 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.3% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $193 million 
expenditures: 
  $355 million, including capital expenditures of $106 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $294 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  uranium ore 60%, livestock products 20%, cowpeas, onions
partners: 
  France 77%, Nigeria 8%, Cote d'Ivoire, Italy
Imports: 
  $346 million (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  primary materials, machinery, vehicles and parts, electronic
  equipment, cereals, petroleum products, pharmaceuticals, chemical
  products, foodstuffs
partners: 
  Germany 26%, Cote d'Ivoire 11%, France 5%, Italy 4%, Nigeria 2%
External debt: 
  $1.2 billion (December 1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2.7% (1991 est.); accounts for 13% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  105,000 kW
production: 
  230 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  30 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  cement, brick, textiles, food processing, chemicals, slaughterhouses,
  and a few other small light industries; uranium mining began in 1971
Agriculture: 
  accounts for roughly 40% of GDP and 90% of labor force; cash crops -
  cowpeas, cotton, peanuts; food crops - millet, sorghum, cassava, rice;
  livestock - cattle, sheep, goats; self-sufficient in food except in
  drought years
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $380 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),
  $3.165 billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $504 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $61 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  the official rate is pegged to the French franc, and beginning 12
  January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per French franc
  from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Niger, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  39,970 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 3,170 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, laterite 10,330 km; earth 3,470 km; tracks 23,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Niger River is navigable 300 km from Niamey to Gaya on the Benin
  frontier from mid-December through March
Airports: 
total: 
  30 
usable: 
  28 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  14 
Telecommunications: 
  small system of wire, radiocommunications, and radio relay links
  concentrated in southwestern area; 14,260 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 15 AM, 5 FM, 18 TV; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, and 3 domestic, with 1
  planned

@Niger, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, Gendarmerie, National Police, Republican Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,845,374; fit for military service 994,683; reach
  military age (18) annually 91,595 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $27 million, 1.3% of GDP (1989)


@Nigeria, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Benin and
  Cameroon
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  923,770 sq km 
land area: 
  910,770 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of California
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,047 km, Benin 773 km, Cameroon 1,690 km, Chad 87 km, Niger
  1,497 km 
Coastline: 
  853 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  30 nm
International disputes: 
  demarcation of international boundaries in Lake Chad, the lack of
  which has led to border incidents in the past, is completed and
  awaiting ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria; boundary
  commission, created with Cameroon to discuss unresolved land and
  maritime boundaries, has not yet convened, but a commission was formed
  January 1994 to study a flare-up of the dispute
Climate: 
  varies; equatorial in south, tropical in center, arid in north
Terrain: 
  southern lowlands merge into central hills and plateaus; mountains in
  southeast, plains in north
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, tin, columbite, iron ore, coal, limestone, lead, zinc,
  natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  31% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  23% 
forest and woodland: 
  15% 
other: 
  28% 
Irrigated land: 
  8,650 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil degradation; rapid deforestation; desertification; recent
  droughts in north severely affecting marginal agricultural activities
natural hazards: 
  periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change

@Nigeria, People

Population: 
  98,091,097 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.15% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.52 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.43 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.36 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  75 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  55.33 years 
male: 
  54.11 years 
female: 
  56.59 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.37 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Nigerian(s) 
adjective: 
  Nigerian 
Ethnic divisions: 
north: 
  Hausa and Fulani 
southwest: 
  Yoruba 
southeast: 
  Ibos 
  non-Africans 27,000
note: 
  Hausa and Fulani, Yoruba, and Ibos together make up 65% of population
Religions: 
  Muslim 50%, Christian 40%, indigenous beliefs 10% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo, Fulani 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  51% 
male: 
  62% 
female: 
  40% 
Labor force: 
  42.844 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 54%, industry, commerce, and services 19%, government 15%
note: 
  49% of population of working age (1985)

@Nigeria, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Federal Republic of Nigeria 
conventional short form: 
  Nigeria 
Digraph: 
  NI
Type: 
  military government since 31 December 1983; plans to institute a
  constitutional conference to prepare for a new transition to civilian
  rule after plans for a transition in 1993 were negated by General
  BABANGIDA
Capital: 
  Abuja 
note: 
  on 12 December 1991 the capital was officially moved from Lagos to
  Abuja; many government offices remain in Lagos pending completion of
  facilities in Abuja
Administrative divisions: 
  30 states and 1 territory*; Abia, Abuja Capital Territory*, Adamawa,
  Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi, Benue, Borno, Cross River, Delta, Edo,
  Enugu, Imo, Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos,
  Niger, Ogun, Ondo, Osun, Oyo, Plateau, Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe
Independence: 
  1 October 1960 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 October (1960) 
Constitution: 
  1979 constitution still in force; plan for 1989 constitution to take
  effect in 1993 was not implemented
Legal system: 
  based on English common law, Islamic law, and tribal law
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council and Commander in Chief of
  Armed Forces and Defense Minister Gen. Sani ABACHA (since 17 November
  1993); Vice-Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council Oladipo DIYA
  (since 17 November 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Federal Executive Council 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly
Senate: 
  suspended after coup of 17 November 1993
House of Representatives: 
  suspended after coup of 17 November 1993
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Federal Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
note: 
  two political party system suspended after the coup of 17 November
  1993
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMO, IMF, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, OIC
  (observer), OPEC, PCA, UN, UNAVEM, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIKOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Zubair Mahmud KAZAURE 
chancery: 
  1333 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 986-8400 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Walter CARRINGTON 
embassy: 
  2 Eleke Crescent, Lagos 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 554, Lagos 
telephone: 
  [234] (1) 610050 
FAX: 
  [234] (1) 610257 
consulate(s) general: 
  Kaduna 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and green

@Nigeria, Economy

Overview: 
  The oil-rich Nigerian economy continues to be hobbled by poor
  macroeconomic management that has resulted in an average annual
  inflation rate of 60%, a growing foreign debt, and a worsening balance
  of payments. A deepening political crisis in 1993 has compounded the
  government's failure to reign in deficit spending, which prevents it
  from reaching an agreement with the IMF and its bilateral creditors on
  debt relief. Investment in both oil and non-oil sector industry has
  been undermined by corruption and squandered on white elephant
  projects that have failed to generate diversification or new
  employment.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $95.1 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.1% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  60% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  28% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $10.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $11.9 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  oil 95%, cocoa, rubber
partners: 
  US 54%, EC 23%
Imports: 
  $8.3 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, manufactured goods, food and animals
partners: 
  EC 64%, US 10%, Japan 7%
External debt: 
  $29.5 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7.7% (1991); accounts for 43% of GDP, including petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  4,740,000 kW
production: 
  8.3 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  70 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  crude oil and mining - coal, tin, columbite; primary processing
  industries - palm oil, peanut, cotton, rubber, wood, hides and skins;
  manufacturing industries - textiles, cement, building materials, food
  products, footwear, chemical, printing, ceramics, steel
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 35% of GDP and half of labor force; inefficient
  small-scale farming dominates; once a large net exporter of food and
  now an importer; cash crops - cocoa, peanuts, palm oil, rubber; food
  crops - corn, rice, sorghum, millet, cassava, yams; livestock -
  cattle, sheep, goats, pigs; fishing and forestry resources extensively
  exploited
Illicit drugs: 
  passenger and cargo air hub for West Africa; facilitates movement of
  heroin en route from Southeast and Southwest Asia to Western Europe
  and North America; increasingly a transit route for cocaine from South
  America intended for West European, East Asian, and North American
  markets
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $705 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $3
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $2.2 billion 
Currency: 
  1 naira (N) = 100 kobo
Exchange rates: 
  naira (N) per US$1 - 21.886 (November 1993), 17.298 (1992), 9.909
  (1991), 8.038 (1990), 7.3647 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Nigeria, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,505 km 1.067-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  107,990 km 
paved: 
  mostly bituminous-surface treatment 30,019 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, improved earth 25,411 km; unimproved earth
  52,560 km 
Inland waterways: 
  8,575 km consisting of Niger and Benue Rivers and smaller rivers and
  creeks
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,042 km; petroleum products 3,000 km; natural gas 500 km 
Ports: 
  Lagos, Port Harcourt, Calabar, Warri, Onne, Sapele
Merchant marine: 
  33 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 432,704 GRT/686,718 DWT, bulk 1,
  cargo 18, chemical tanker 3, liquified gas 1, oil tanker 9,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  80 
usable: 
  67 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  34 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  15 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  21 
Telecommunications: 
  above-average system limited by poor maintenance; major expansion in
  progress; radio relay microwave and cable routes; broadcast stations -
  35 AM, 17 FM, 28 TV; satellite earth stations - 2 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 20 domestic stations; 1 coaxial
  submarine cable

@Nigeria, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 22,468,803; fit for military service 12,840,029; reach
  military age (18) annually 986,518 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $172 million, about 1% of GDP (1992)


@Niue

Header
Affiliation: 
  (free association with New Zealand) 

@Niue, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, 460 km east of Tonga in the South Pacific Ocean
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  260 sq km 
land area: 
  260 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  64 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; modified by southeast trade winds
Terrain: 
  steep limestone cliffs along coast, central plateau
Natural resources: 
  fish, arable land 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  61% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  19% 
other: 
  12% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  one of world's largest coral islands

@Niue, People

Population: 
  1,906 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.66% (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Niuean(s) 
adjective: 
  Niuean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian (with some 200 Europeans, Samoans, and Tongans)
Religions: 
  Ekalesia Nieue (Niuean Church) 75% - a Protestant church closely
  related to the London Missionary Society, Morman 10%, other  15%
  (mostly Roman Catholic, Jehovah's Witnesses, Seventh-Day Adventist)
Languages: 
  Polynesian closely related to Tongan and Samoan, English 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  1,000 (1981 est.)
by occupation: 
  most work on family plantations; paid work exists only in government
  service, small industry, and the Niue Development Board

@Niue, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Niue 
Digraph: 
  NE
Type: 
  self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand; Niue
  fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand retains
  responsibility for external affairs
Capital: 
  Alofi 
Administrative divisions: 
  none
Independence: 
  19 October 1974 (became a self-governing territory in free association
  with New Zealand on 19 October 1974)
National holiday: 
  Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of Waitangi established
  British sovereignty)
Constitution: 
  19 October 1974 (Niue Constitution Act)
Legal system: 
  English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by New Zealand
  Representative Kurt MEYER (since NA) 
head of government: 
  Premier Frank F. LUI (since 12 March 1993; Acting Premier since
  December 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; consists of the premier and three other ministers
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly: 
  elections last held on 6 March 1993 (next to be held NA 1996); results
  - percent of vote NA; seats - (20 total, 6 elected)
Judicial branch: 
  Appeal Court of New Zealand, High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Niue Island Party (NIP), Young VIVIAN
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), INTELSAT (signatory user), SPARTECA, SPC, SPF 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand)
Flag: 
  yellow with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant; the
  flag of the UK bears five yellow five-pointed stars - a large one on a
  blue disk in the center and a smaller one on each arm of the bold red
  cross

@Niue, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is heavily dependent on aid from New Zealand. Government
  expenditures regularly exceed revenues, with the shortfall made up by
  grants from New Zealand - the grants are used to pay wages to public
  employees. The agricultural sector consists mainly of subsistence
  gardening, although some cash crops are grown for export. Industry
  consists primarily of small factories to process passion fruit, lime
  oil, honey, and coconut cream. The sale of postage stamps to foreign
  collectors is an important source of revenue. The island in recent
  years has suffered a serious loss of population because of migration
  of Niueans to New Zealand.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $2.1 million (1989 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1989 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.6% (1984)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $5.5 million 
expenditures: 
  $6.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1985 est.)
Exports: 
  $175,274 (f.o.b., 1985)
commodities: 
  canned coconut cream, copra, honey, passion fruit products, pawpaw,
  root crops, limes, footballs, stamps, handicrafts
partners: 
  NZ 89%, Fiji, Cook Islands, Australia
Imports: 
  $3.8 million (c.i.f., 1985)
commodities: 
  food, live animals, manufactured goods, machinery, fuels, lubricants,
  chemicals, drugs
partners: 
  NZ 59%, Fiji 20%, Japan 13%, Western Samoa, Australia, US
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,500 kW
production: 
  3 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,490 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourist, handicrafts, coconut products
Agriculture: 
  coconuts, passion fruit, honey, limes; subsistence crops - taro, yams,
  cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, poultry, beef cattle
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $62 million 
Currency: 
  1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.7771 (January 1994), 1.8495
  (1993), 1.8584 (1992), 1.7265 (1991), 1.6750 (1990), 1.6711 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Niue, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  229 km 
unpaved: 
  all-weather 123 km; plantation access 106 km 
Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  single-line telephone system connects all villages on island; 383
  telephones; 1,000 radio receivers (1987 est.); broadcast stations - 1
  AM, 1 FM, no TV

@Niue, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Police Force 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of New Zealand


@Norfolk Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Australia) 

@Norfolk Island, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Oceania, 1,575 km east of Australia in the South Pacific
  Ocean
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  34.6 sq km 
land area: 
  34.6 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.2 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  32 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical, mild, little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  volcanic formation with mostly rolling plains
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  25% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  75% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons (especially May to July)
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Norfolk Island, People

Population: 
  2,710 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.7% (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Norfolk Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Norfolk Islander(s) 
Ethnic divisions: 
  descendants of the Bounty mutineers, Australian, New Zealander 
Religions: 
  Anglican 39%, Roman Catholic 11.7%, Uniting Church in Australia 16.4%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist 4.4%, none 9.2%, unknown 16.9%, other 2.4%
  (1986)
Languages: 
  English (official), Norfolk a mixture of 18th century English and
  ancient Tahitian
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Norfolk Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of Norfolk Island 
conventional short form: 
  Norfolk Island 
Digraph: 
  NF
Type: 
  territory of Australia 
Capital: 
  Kingston (administrative center);  Burnt Pine (commercial center)
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Independence: 
  none (territory of Australia)
National holiday: 
  Pitcairners Arrival Day Anniversary, 8 June (1856) 
Constitution: 
  Norfolk Island Act of 1979
Legal system: 
  wide legislative and executive responsibility under the Norfolk Island
  Act of 1979; Supreme Court
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by
  Administrator A. G. KERR (since NA April 1992), who is appointed by
  the Governor General of Australia 
head of government: 
  Assembly President David Ernest BUFFETT (since NA May 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly: 
  elections last held 1989 (held every three years); results - percent
  of vote by party NA; seats - (9 total) percent of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of Australia)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of Australia)
Flag: 
  three vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and green with a
  large green Norfolk Island pine tree centered in the slightly wider
  white band

@Norfolk Island, Economy

Overview: 
  The primary economic activity is tourism, which has brought a level of
  prosperity unusual among inhabitants of the Pacific Islands. The
  number of visitors has increased steadily over the years and reached
  29,000 in FY89. Revenues from tourism have given the island a
  favorable balance of trade and helped the agricultural sector to
  become self-sufficient in the production of beef, poultry, and eggs.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $4.2 million, including capital expenditures of $400,000 (1989 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.7 million (f.o.b., FY86)
commodities: 
  postage stamps, seeds of the Norfolk Island pine and Kentia palm,
  small quantities of avocados
partners: 
  Australia, Pacific Islands, NZ, Asia, Europe
Imports: 
  $15.6 million (c.i.f., FY86)
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  Australia, Pacific Islands, NZ, Asia, Europe
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  7,000 kW
production: 
  8 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,160 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourism
Agriculture: 
  Norfolk Island pine seed, Kentia palm seed, cereals, vegetables,
  fruit, cattle, poultry
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364 (January 1994), 1.4704
  (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2835 (1991), 1.2799 (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Norfolk Island, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  80 km 
paved: 
  53 km 
unpaved: 
  earth, coral 27 km 
Ports: 
  none; loading jetties at Kingston and Cascade
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  1,500 radio receivers (1982); radio link service with Sydney; 987
  telephones (1983); broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV

@Norfolk Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of Australia


@Northern Mariana Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (commonwealth in political union with the US) 

@Northern Mariana Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 5,635 km
  west-southwest of Honolulu, about three-quarters of the way between
  Hawaii and the Philippines
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  477 sq km 
land area: 
  477 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes 14 islands including Saipan, Rota, and Tinian
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  1,482 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine; moderated by northeast trade winds, little seasonal
  temperature variation; dry season December to June, rainy season July
  to October
Terrain: 
  southern islands are limestone with level terraces and fringing coral
  reefs; northern islands are volcanic; highest elevation is 471 meters
  (Mt. Okso' Takpochao on Saipan)
Natural resources: 
  arable land, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% on Saipan
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  19% 
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  contamination of groundwater on Saipan by raw sewage contributes to
  disease
natural hazards: 
  active volcanoes on Pagan and Agrihan; subject to typhoons (especially
  August to November)
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean

@Northern Mariana Islands, People

Population: 
  49,799 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.04% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  35.05 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.61 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  37.96 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.43 years 
male: 
  65.53 years 
female: 
  69.48 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.69 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  NA 
adjective: 
  NA 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chamorro, Carolinians and other Micronesians, Caucasian, Japanese,
  Chinese, Korean 
Religions: 
  Christian (Roman Catholic majority, although traditional beliefs and
  taboos may still be found)
Languages: 
  English, Chamorro, Carolinian 
note: 
  86% of population speaks a language other than English at home
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  96% 
Labor force: 
  7,476 total indigenous labor force, 2,699 unemployed; 21,188 foreign
  workers (1990)
by occupation: 
  NA

@Northern Mariana Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Northern Mariana Islands 
Digraph: 
  CQ
Type: 
  commonwealth in political union with the US; self-governing with
  locally elected governor, lieutenant governor, and legislature;
  federal funds to the Commonwealth administered by the US Department of
  the Interior, Office of Territorial and International Affairs
Capital: 
  Saipan 
Administrative divisions: 
  none
Independence: 
  none (commonwealth in political union with the US)
National holiday: 
  Commonwealth Day, 8 January (1978) 
Constitution: 
  Covenant Agreement effective 3 November 1986 and the Constitution of
  the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
Legal system: 
  based on US system except for customs, wages, immigration laws, and
  taxation
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal; indigenous inhabitants are US citizens but
  do not vote in US presidential elections
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January 1993); Vice
  President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993) 
head of government: 
  Governor Lorenzo I. DeLeon GUERRERO (since 9 January 1990); Lieutenant
  Governor Benjamin T. MANGLONA (since 9 January 1990); election last
  held in NA November 1989 (next to be held NA November 1993); results -
  Lorenzo I. DeLeon GUERRERO, Republican Party, was elected governor
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Legislature
Senate: 
  elections last held NA November 1991 (next to be held NA November
  1993); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (9 total)
  Republicans 6, Democrats 3
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held NA November 1991 (next to be held NA November
  1993); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (18 total)
  Republicans 10, Democrats 6, Independent 2
US House of Representatives: 
  the Commonwealth does not have a nonvoting delegate in Congress;
  instead, it has an elected official "resident representative" located
  in Washington, DC; seats - (1 total) Republican (Juan N. BABAUTA)
Judicial branch: 
  Commonwealth Supreme Court, Superior Court, Federal District Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Republican Party, Governor Lorenzo GUERRERO; Democratic Party, Carlos
  SHODA, chairman
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), SPC 
Flag: 
  blue with a white five-pointed star superimposed on the gray
  silhouette of a latte stone (a traditional foundation stone used in
  building) in the center

@Northern Mariana Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy benefits substantially from financial assistance from the
  US. The rate of funding has declined as locally generated government
  revenues have grown. An agreement for the years 1986 to 1992 entitled
  the islands to $228 million for capital development, government
  operations, and special programs. A rapidly growing major source of
  income is the tourist industry, which now employs about 50% of the
  work force. Japanese tourists predominate. The agricultural sector is
  made up of cattle ranches and small farms producing coconuts,
  breadfruit, tomatoes, and melons. Industry is small scale, mostly
  handicrafts and light manufacturing.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $541 million (1992)
note: 
  GNP numbers reflect US spending
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $11,500 (1992)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6.5-7.5% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $147 million 
expenditures: 
  $127.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $263.4 million (f.o.b. 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, garments, bread, pastries, concrete blocks, light
  iron work
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $392.4 million (c.i.f. 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  food, construction, equipment, materials
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $0 
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  25,000 kW
production: 
  35 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  740 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourism, construction, light industry, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  coconuts, fruits, cattle, vegetables
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Northern Mariana Islands, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  381.5 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
undifferentiated: 
  primary 134.5 km; secondary 55 km; local 192 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  none
Ports: 
  Saipan, Tinian
Airports: 
total: 
  6 
usable: 
  5 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, 1 FM (1984), 1 TV, 2 cable TV stations; 2
  Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@Northern Mariana Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Norway, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  west of Sweden
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  324,220 sq km 
land area: 
  307,860 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,515 km, Finland 729 km, Sweden 1,619 km, Russia 167 km 
Coastline: 
  21,925 km (includes mainland 3,419 km, large islands 2,413 km, long
  fjords, numerous small islands, and minor indentations 16,093 km)
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  10 nm
continental shelf: 
  to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  4 nm
International disputes: 
  territorial claim in Antarctica (Queen Maud Land); dispute between
  Denmark and Norway over maritime boundary in Arctic Ocean between
  Greenland and Jan Mayen has been settled by the International Court of
  Justice; maritime boundary dispute with Russia over portion of Barents
  Sea
Climate: 
  temperate along coast, modified by North Atlantic Current; colder
  interior; rainy year-round on west coast
Terrain: 
  glaciated; mostly high plateaus and rugged mountains broken by fertile
  valleys; small, scattered plains; coastline deeply indented by fjords;
  arctic tundra in north
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, copper, natural gas, pyrites, nickel, iron ore, zinc, lead,
  fish, timber, hydropower 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  27% 
other: 
  70% 
Irrigated land: 
  950 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution; acid rain damaging forests and adversely affecting
  lakes, threatening fish stocks; air pollution from vehicle emissions
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  about two-thirds mountains; some 50,000 islands off its much indented
  coastline; strategic location adjacent to sea lanes and air routes in
  North Atlantic; one of most rugged and longest coastlines in world;
  Norway and Turkey only NATO members having a land boundary with Russia

@Norway, People

Population: 
  4,314,604 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.39% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.32 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.44 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.01 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.38 years 
male: 
  74.02 years 
female: 
  80.94 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.81 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Norwegian(s) 
adjective: 
  Norwegian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Germanic (Nordic, Alpine, Baltic), Lapps (Sami) 20,000
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 87.8% (state church), other Protestant and Roman
  Catholic 3.8%, none 3.2%, unknown 5.2% (1980)
Languages: 
  Norwegian (official)
note: 
  small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1976 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  2.004 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  services 39.1%, commerce 17.6%, mining, oil, and manufacturing 16.0%,
  banking and financial services 7.6%, transportation and communications
  7.8%, construction 6.1%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 5.5%
  (1989)

@Norway, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Norway 
conventional short form: 
  Norway 
local long form: 
  Kongeriket Norge 
local short form: 
  Norge 
Digraph: 
  NO
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Oslo 
Administrative divisions: 
  19 provinces (fylker, singular - fylke); Akershus, Aust-Agder,
  Buskerud, Finnmark, Hedmark, Hordaland, More og Romsdal, Nordland,
  Nord-Trondelag, Oppland, Oslo, Ostfold, Rogaland, Sogn og Fjordane,
  Sor-Trondelag, Telemark, Troms, Vest-Agder, Vestfold
Dependent areas: 
  Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard 
Independence: 
  26 October 1905 (from Sweden)
National holiday: 
  Constitution Day, 17 May (1814) 
Constitution: 
  17 May 1814, modified in 1884
Legal system: 
  mixture of customary law, civil law system, and common law traditions;
  Supreme Court renders advisory opinions to legislature when asked;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King HARALD V (since 17 January 1991); Heir Apparent Crown Prince
  HAAKON MAGNUS (born 20 July 1973) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Gro Harlem BRUNDTLAND (since 3 November 1990) 
cabinet: 
  State Council; appointed by the king in accordance with the will of
  the Storting
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Parliament (Storting)
Storting: 
  elections last held on 13 September 1993 (next to be held September
  1997); results - Labor 37.1%, Center Party 18.5%, Conservatives 15.6%,
  Christian Peoples' 8.4%, Socialist Left 7.9%, Progress 6%, Left Party
  3.6%, Red Electoral Alliance 1.2%; seats - (165 total) Labor 67,
  Center Party 32, Consevatives 18, Christian Peoples' 13, Socialist
  Left 13, Progress 10, Left Party 1, Red Electoral Alliance 1,
  unawarded 10
Lagting: 
  Storting elects one-fourth of its member to upper house
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Hoyesterett) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Labor Party, Thorbjorn JAGLUND; Conservative Party, Jan PETERSEN;
  Center Party, Anne ENGER LAHNSTEIN; Christian People's Party, Kjell
  Magne BONDEVIK; Socialist Left, Eric SOLHEIM; Norwegian Communist,
  Ingre IVERSEN; Progress Party, Carl I. HAGEN; Liberal, Odd Einar
  DORUM; Finnmark List, leader NA; Left Party; Red Electoral Alliance
Member of: 
  AfDB, AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE,
  EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NC, NEA, NIB,
  NSG, OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMOGIP, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WEU
  (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Kjeld VIBE 
chancery: 
  2720 34th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 333-6000 
FAX: 
  (202) 337-0870 
consulate(s) general: 
  Houston, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, and San Francisco 
consulate(s): 
  Miami 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Thomas A. LOFTUS 
embassy: 
  Drammensveien 18, 0244 Oslo 2 
mailing address: 
  PSC 69, Box 1000, APO AE 09707 
telephone: 
  [47] 22-44-85-50 
FAX: 
  [47] 22-43-07-77 
Flag: 
  red with a blue cross outlined in white that extends to the edges of
  the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side
  in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

@Norway, Economy

Overview: 
  Norway has a mixed economy involving a combination of free market
  activity and government intervention. The government controls key
  areas, such as the vital petroleum sector (through large-scale state
  enterprises) and extensively subsidizes agriculture, fishing, and
  areas with sparse resources. Norway also maintains an extensive
  welfare system that helps propel public sector expenditures to
  slightly more than 50% of the GDP and results in one of the highest
  average tax burdens in the world (54%). A small country with a high
  dependence on international trade, Norway is basically an exporter of
  raw materials and semiprocessed goods, with an abundance of small- and
  medium-sized firms, and is ranked among the major shipping nations.
  The country is richly endowed with natural resources - petroleum,
  hydropower, fish, forests, and minerals - and is highly dependent on
  its oil sector to keep its economy afloat. Although one of the
  government's main priorities is to reduce this dependency, this
  situation is not likely to improve for years to come. The government
  also hopes to reduce unemployment and strengthen and diversify the
  economy through tax reform and a series of expansionary budgets. The
  budget deficit is expected to hit a record 8% of GDP because of
  welfare spending and bail-outs of the banking system. Unemployment
  continues at record levels of over 10% - including those in job
  programs - because of the weakness of the economy outside the oil
  sector. Economic growth was only 1.6% in 1993, while inflation was a
  moderate 2.3%. Oslo, a member of the European Free Trade Area, has
  applied for membership in the European Union and continues to
  deregulate and harmonize with EU regulations. Membership is expected
  in early 1995.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $89.5 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.6% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $20,800 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.5% (excluding people in job-training programs; 1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $45.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $51.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993)
Exports: 
  $32.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  petroleum and petroleum products 40%, metals and products 10.6%, fish
  and fish products 6.9%, chemicals 6.4%, natural gas 6.0%, ships 5.4%
partners: 
  EC 66.3%, Nordic countries 16.3%, developing countries 8.4%, US 6.0%,
  Japan 1.8% (1993)
Imports: 
  $24.8 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment 38.9%, chemicals and other industrial inputs
  26.6%, manufactured consumer goods 17.8%, foodstuffs 6.4%
partners: 
  EC 48.6%, Nordic countries 25.1%, developing countries 9.6%, US 8.1%,
  Japan 8.0% (1993)
External debt: 
  $6.5 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.2% (1992); accounts for 14% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  26,900,000 kW
production: 
  111 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  25,850 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum and gas, food processing, shipbuilding, pulp and paper
  products, metals, chemicals, timber, mining, textiles, fishing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 3% of GDP and about 6% of labor force; among world's top
  10 fishing nations; livestock output exceeds value of crops; over half
  of food needs imported; fish catch of 1.76 million metric tons in 1989
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for drugs shipped via the CIS and Baltic states
  for the European market
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $4.4 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Norwegian krone (NKr) = 100 oere
Exchange rates: 
  Norwegian kroner (NKr) per US$1 - 7.4840 (January 1994), 7.0941
  (1993), 6.2145 (1992), 6.4829 (1991), 6.2597 (1990), 6.9045 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Norway, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,223 km 1.435-meter standard gauge; Norwegian State Railways (NSB)
  operates 4,219 km (2,450 km electrified and 96 km double track); 4 km
  other
Highways: 
total: 
  88,800 km 
paved: 
  38,580 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 50,220 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,577 km along west coast; 2.4 m draft vessels maximum
Pipelines: 
  refined products 53 km 
Ports: 
  Oslo, Bergen, Fredrikstad, Kristiansand, Stavanger, Trondheim
Merchant marine: 
  764 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 20,793,968 GRT/35,409,472 DWT,
  bulk 159, cargo 92, chemical tanker 85, combination bulk 8,
  combination ore/oil 28, container 17, liquefied gas 81, oil tanker
  162, passenger 13, passenger-cargo 2, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated
  cargo 13, roll-on/roll-off cargo 54, short-sea passenger 21, vehicle
  carrier 28 
note: 
  the government has created a captive register, the Norwegian
  International Ship Register (NIS), as a subset of the Norwegian
  register; ships on the NIS enjoy many benefits of flags of convenience
  and do not have to be crewed by Norwegians; the majority of ships
  (761) under the Norwegian flag are now registered with the NIS
Airports: 
total: 
  103 
usable: 
  102 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  65 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  13 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  15 
Telecommunications: 
  high-quality domestic and international telephone, telegraph, and
  telex services; 2 buried coaxial cable systems; 3,102,000 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 46 AM, 350 private and 143 government FM, 54
  (2,100 repeaters) TV; 4 coaxial submarine cables; 3 communications
  satellite earth stations operating in the EUTELSAT, INTELSAT (1
  Atlantic Ocean), MARISAT, and domestic systems


@Norway, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Norwegian Army, Royal Norwegian Navy, Royal Norwegian Air Force, Home
  Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,119,405; fit for military service 932,438; reach
  military age (20) annually 30,557 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $3.1 billion, 3.2% of GDP (1993)


@Oman, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, along the Arabian Sea, between Yemen and the United Arab
  Emirates
Map references: 
  Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  212,460 sq km 
land area: 
  212,460 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Kansas
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,374 km, Saudi Arabia 676 km, UAE 410 km, Yemen 288 km 
Coastline: 
  2,092 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  to be defined
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  no defined boundary with most of UAE; Administrative Line with UAE in
  far north; a treaty with Yemen defining the Omani-Yemeni boundary was
  ratified in December 1992
Climate: 
  dry desert; hot, humid along coast; hot, dry interior; strong
  southwest summer monsoon (May to September) in far south
Terrain: 
  vast central desert plain, rugged mountains in north and south
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, copper, asbestos, some marble, limestone, chromium, gypsum,
  natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  less than 2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  93% 
Irrigated land: 
  410 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  rising soil salinity; beach pollution from oil spills; sparse natural
  freshwater resources
natural hazards: 
  summer winds often raise large sandstorms and dust storms in interior
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ship Pollution, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  strategic location with small foothold on Musandam Peninsula
  controlling Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit point for world crude
  oil

@Oman, People

Population: 
  1,701,470 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  Oman's first census was concluded in December 1993; preliminary
  figures give a population of 2,000,000, of whom about 500,000 are
  expatriate workers; final evaluative figures are not yet available
Population growth rate: 
  3.46% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  40.38 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.77 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  36.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.79 years 
male: 
  65.9 years 
female: 
  69.77 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.53 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Omani(s) 
adjective: 
  Omani 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab, Baluchi, South Asian (Indian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan,
  Bangladeshi) 
Religions: 
  Ibadhi Muslim 75%, Sunni Muslim, Shi'a Muslim, Hindu 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), English, Baluchi, Urdu, Indian dialects 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  430,000 (est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 40% (est.)

@Oman, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Sultanate of Oman 
conventional short form: 
  Oman 
local long form: 
  Saltanat Uman 
local short form: 
  Uman 
Digraph: 
  MU
Type: 
  monarchy 
Capital: 
  Muscat 
Administrative divisions: 
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 3 governorates (muhafazah, singular -
  muhafazat); Masqat, Musandam, Zufar
Independence: 
  1650 (expulsion of the Portuguese)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 18 November (1940) 
Constitution: 
  none
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and Islamic law; ultimate appeal to the
  sultan; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al Said (since 23 July 1970)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Consultative Council
Judicial branch: 
  none; traditional Islamic judges and a nascent civil court system
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Ahmad bin Muhammad al-RASBI 
chancery: 
  2342 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 387-1980 through 1982 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador David J. DUNFORD 
embassy: 
  address NA, Muscat 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 202 Code No. 115, Muscat 
telephone: 
  [968] 698-989 
FAX: 
  [968] 604-316 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of white (top, double width), red, and green
  (double width) with a broad, vertical, red band on the hoist side; the
  national emblem (a khanjar dagger in its sheath superimposed on two
  crossed swords in scabbards) in white is centered at the top of the
  vertical band

@Oman, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic performance is closely tied to the fortunes of the oil
  industry, including trends in international oil prices and the ability
  of OPEC producers to agree on output quotas. Petroleum accounts for
  more than 85% of export earnings, about 80% of government revenues,
  and roughly 40% of GDP. Oman has proved oil reserves of 4 billion
  barrels, equivalent to about 20 years' supply at the current rate of
  extraction. Agriculture is carried on at a subsistence level and the
  general population depends on imported food. The government is
  encouraging private investment, both domestic and foreign, as a prime
  force for further economic development.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent -  $16.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $10,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $4.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $5.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $1 billion (1994 est.)
Exports: 
  $5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum 87%, re-exports, fish, processed copper, textiles
partners: 
  UAE 30%, Japan 27%, South Korea 10%, Singapore 5% (1991)
Imports: 
  $3.7 billion (f.o.b, 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, transportation equipment, manufactured goods, food,
  livestock, lubricants
partners: 
  Japan 20%, UAE 14%, UK 19%, US 7% (1991)
External debt: 
  $3 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 8.6% (1991); accounts for almost 60% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,142,400 kW
production: 
  5.1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,200 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  crude oil production and refining, natural gas production,
  construction, cement, copper
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4% of GDP and 40% of the labor force (including fishing);
  less than 2% of land cultivated; largely subsistence farming (dates,
  limes, bananas, alfalfa, vegetables, camels, cattle); not
  self-sufficient in food; annual fish catch averages 100,000 metric
  tons
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $137 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $148
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $797 million 
Currency: 
  1 Omani rial (RO) = 1,000 baiza
Exchange rates: 
  Omani rials (RO) per US$1 - 0.3845 (fixed rate since 1986)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Oman, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  26,000 km 
paved: 
  6,000 km 
unpaved: 
  motorable track 20,000 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,300 km; natural gas 1,030 km 
Ports: 
  Mina' Qabus, Mina' Raysut, Mina' al Fahl
Merchant marine: 
  1 passenger ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,442 GRT/1,320 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  138 
usable: 
  130 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  9 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  74 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system consisting of open-wire, microwave, and radio
  communications stations; limited coaxial cable; 50,000 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, 3 FM, 7 TV; satellite earth stations - 2
  Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 ARABSAT, and 8 domestic

@Oman, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Royal Oman Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 382,793; fit for military service 217,755; reach
  military age (14) annually 22,118 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.6 billion, 16% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the

Header
Affiliation: 
  (UN trusteeship administered by the US) 

@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 850 km southeast of
  the Philippines
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  458 sq km 
land area: 
  458 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  1,519 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  wet season May to November; hot and humid
Terrain: 
  about 200 islands varying geologically from the high, mountainous main
  island of Babelthuap to low, coral islands usually fringed by large
  barrier reefs
Natural resources: 
  forests, minerals (especially gold), marine products, deep-seabed
  minerals 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons (June to December)
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  includes World War II battleground of Peleliu and world-famous rock
  islands; archipelago of six island groups totaling over 200 islands in
  the Caroline chain

@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the, People

Population: 
  16,366 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.81% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  22.54 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.61 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  25.07 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.01 years 
male: 
  69.14 years 
female: 
  73.02 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.91 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Palauan(s) 
adjective: 
  Palauan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Palauans are a composite of Polynesian, Malayan, and Melanesian races
Religions: 
  Christian (Catholics, Seventh-Day Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses, the
  Assembly of God, the Liebenzell Mission, and Latter-Day Saints),
  Modekngei religion (one-third of the population observes this religion
  which is indigenous to Palau)
Languages: 
  English (official in all of Palau's 16 states), Sonsorolese (official
  in the state of Sonsoral), Angaur and Japanese (in the state of
  Anguar), Tobi (in the state of Tobi), Palauan (in the other 13 states)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  92% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  91% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  NA

@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands 
conventional short form: 
  none 
note: 
  may change to Republic of Palau after independence; the native form of
  Palau is Belau and is sometimes used incorrectly in English and other
  languages
Digraph: 
  PS
Type: 
  UN trusteeship administered by the US 
note: 
  constitutional government signed a Compact of Free Association with
  the US on 10 January 1986, which was never approved in a series of
  UN-observed plebiscites; until the UN trusteeship is terminated with
  entry into force of the Compact, Palau remains under US administration
  as the Palau District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands;
  administrative authority resides in the Department of the Interior and
  is exercised by the Assistant Secretary for Territorial and
  International Affairs through the Palau Office, Trust Territory of the
  Pacific Islands, J. Victor HOBSON Jr., Director (since 16 December
  1990)
Capital: 
  Koror 
note: 
  a new capital is being built about 20 km northeast in eastern
  Babelthuap
Administrative divisions: 
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 16 states: Aimeliik, Airai, Angaur,
  Kayangel, Koror, Melekeok, Ngaraard, Ngardmau, Ngaremlengui, Ngatpang,
  Ngchesar, Ngerchelong, Ngiwal, Peleliu, Sonsorol, Tobi
Independence: 
  the last polity remaining under the US-administered UN trusteeship
  following the departure of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the
  Federated States of Micronesia, and the Commonwealth of the Northern
  Marianas from the trusteeship; administered by the Office of
  Territorial and International Affairs, US Department of Interior
National holiday: 
  Constitution Day, 9 July (1979) 
Constitution: 
  1 January 1981
Legal system: 
  based on Trust Territory laws, acts of the legislature, municipal,
  common, and customary laws
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Kuniwo NAKAMURA (since 1 January 1993), Vice-President Tommy
  E. REMENGESAU Jr. (since 1 January 1993); election last held on 4
  November 1992 (next to be held NA November 1996); results - Kuniwo
  NAKAMURA 50.7%, Johnson TORIBIONG 49.3%
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Olbiil Era Kelulau or OEK)
Senate: 
  elections last held 4 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (14 total);
  number of seats by party NA
House of Delegates: 
  elections last held 4 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (16 total);
  number of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, National Court, Court of Common Pleas 
Member of: 
  ESCAP (associate), SPC, SPF (observer) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  trust territory of the UN administered by the US: Administrative
  Officer Charles UONG, Palau Liaison Office, 444 North Capitol Street
  NW, Suite 308, Washington, DC 20001
US diplomatic representation: 
director: 
  US Liaison Officer Lloyd W. MOSS 
liaison office: 
  US Liaison Office at Top Side, Neeriyas, Koror 
mailing address: 
  P.O. Box 6028, Koror, PW 96940 
telephone: 
  (680) 488-2920; (680) 488-2911 
Flag: 
  light blue with a large yellow disk (representing the moon) shifted
  slightly to the hoist side

@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy consists primarily of subsistence agriculture and fishing.
  Tourism provides some foreign exchange, although the remote location
  of Palau and a shortage of suitable facilities has hindered
  development. The government is the major employer of the work force,
  relying heavily on financial assistance from the US.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $31.6 million (1986)
note: 
  GDP numbers reflect US spending
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $2,260 (1986)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  20% (1986)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $6 million 
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1986 est.)
Exports: 
  $500,000 (f.o.b., 1986)
commodities: 
  trochus (type of shellfish), tuna, copra, handicrafts
partners: 
  US, Japan
Imports: 
  $27.2 million (c.i.f., 1986)
commodities: 
  NA
partners: 
  US
External debt: 
  about $100 million (1989)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  16,000 kW
production: 
  22 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,540 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourism, craft items (shell, wood, pearl), some commercial fishing and
  agriculture
Agriculture: 
  subsistence-level production of coconut, copra, cassava, sweet
  potatoes
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $2.56 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $92
  million 
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  61 km 
paved: 
  36 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 25 km 
Ports: 
  Koror
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, 2 TV; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth
  station

@Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US and that will not change when
  the UN trusteeship terminates if the Compact of Free Association with
  the US goes into effect


@Pacific Ocean, Geography

Location: 
  body of water between the Western Hemisphere, Asia, and Australia
Map references: 
  Asia, North America, Oceania, South America, Standard Time Zones of
  the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  165.384 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 18 times the size of the US; the largest ocean (followed by the
  Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, and the Arctic Ocean); covers about
  one-third of the global surface; larger than the total land area of
  the world
note: 
  includes Bali Sea, Bellingshausen Sea, Bering Sea, Bering Strait,
  Coral Sea, East China Sea, Gulf of Alaska, Gulf of Tonkin, Java Sea,
  Philippine Sea, Ross Sea, Savu Sea, Sea of Japan, Sea of Okhotsk,
  South China Sea, Tasman Sea, Timor Sea, and other tributary water
  bodies
Coastline: 
  135,663 km 
International disputes: 
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)
Climate: 
  the western Pacific is monsoonal - a rainy season occurs during the
  summer months, when moisture-laden winds blow from the ocean over the
  land, and a dry season during the winter months, when dry winds blow
  from the Asian land mass back to the ocean
Terrain: 
  surface currents in the northern Pacific are dominated by a clockwise,
  warm-water gyre (broad circular system of currents) and in the
  southern Pacific by a counterclockwise, cool-water gyre; in the
  northern Pacific sea ice forms in the Bering Sea and Sea of Okhotsk in
  winter; in the southern Pacific sea ice from Antarctica reaches its
  northernmost extent in October; the ocean floor in the eastern Pacific
  is dominated by the East Pacific Rise, while the western Pacific is
  dissected by deep trenches, including the world's deepest, the 10,924
  meter Marianas Trench
Natural resources: 
  oil and gas fields, polymetallic nodules, sand and gravel aggregates,
  placer deposits, fish 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  endangered marine species include the dugong, sea lion, sea otter,
  seals, turtles, and whales; oil pollution in Philippine Sea and South
  China Sea
natural hazards: 
  surrounded by a zone of violent volcanic and earthquake activity
  sometimes referred to as the Pacific Ring of Fire; subject to tropical
  cyclones (typhoons) in southeast and east Asia from May to December
  (most frequent from July to October); tropical cyclones (hurricanes)
  may form south of Mexico and strike Central America and Mexico from
  June to October (most common in August and September); southern
  shipping lanes subject to icebergs from Antarctica; occasional El Nino
  phenomenon occurs off the coast of Peru when the trade winds slacken
  and the warm Equatorial Countercurrent moves south, killing the
  plankton that is the primary food source for anchovies; consequently,
  the anchovies move to better feeding grounds, causing resident marine
  birds to starve by the thousands because of their lost food source
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  the major choke points are the Bering Strait, Panama Canal, Luzon
  Strait, and the Singapore Strait; the Equator divides the Pacific
  Ocean into the North Pacific Ocean and the South Pacific Ocean; ships
  subject to superstructure icing in extreme north from October to May
  and in extreme south from May to October; persistent fog in the
  northern Pacific from June to December is a hazard to shipping; dotted
  with low coral islands and rugged volcanic islands in the southwestern
  Pacific Ocean

@Pacific Ocean, Government

Digraph: 
  ZN

@Pacific Ocean, Economy

Overview: 
  The Pacific Ocean is a major contributor to the world economy and
  particularly to those nations its waters directly touch. It provides
  low-cost sea transportation between East and West, extensive fishing
  grounds, offshore oil and gas fields, minerals, and sand and gravel
  for the construction industry. In 1985 over half (54%) of the world's
  fish catch came from the Pacific Ocean, which is the only ocean where
  the fish catch has increased every year since 1978. Exploitation of
  offshore oil and gas reserves is playing an ever-increasing role in
  the energy supplies of Australia, NZ, China, US, and Peru. The high
  cost of recovering offshore oil and gas, combined with the wide swings
  in world prices for oil since 1985, has slowed but not stopped new
  drillings.
Industries: 
  fishing, oil and gas production

@Pacific Ocean, Communications

Ports: 
  Bangkok (Thailand), Hong Kong, Los Angeles (US), Manila (Philippines),
  Pusan (South Korea), San Francisco (US), Seattle (US), Shanghai
  (China), Singapore, Sydney (Australia), Vladivostok (Russia),
  Wellington (NZ), Yokohama (Japan)
Telecommunications: 
  several submarine cables with network nodal points on Guam and Hawaii


@Pakistan, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, along the Arabian Sea, between India and Afghanistan
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  803,940 sq km 
land area: 
  778,720 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of California
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,774 km, Afghanistan 2,430 km, China 523 km, India 2,912 km,
  Iran 909 km 
Coastline: 
  1,046 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  status of Kashmir with India; border question with Afghanistan (Durand
  Line); water-sharing problems (Wular Barrage) over the Indus with
  upstream riparian India
Climate: 
  mostly hot, dry desert; temperate in northwest; arctic in north
Terrain: 
  flat Indus plain in east; mountains in north and northwest;
  Balochistan plateau in west
Natural resources: 
  land, extensive natural gas reserves, limited petroleum, poor quality
  coal, iron ore, copper, salt, limestone 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  26% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  64% 
Irrigated land: 
  162,200 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from untreated sewage, industrial wastes, and
  agricultural runoff; water scarcity; a majority of the population does
  not have access to safe drinking water; deforestation; soil erosion;
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  frequent earthquakes, occasionally severe especially in north and
  west; flooding along the Indus after heavy rains (July and August)
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  controls Khyber Pass and Bolan Pass, traditional invasion routes
  between Central Asia and the Indian Subcontinent

@Pakistan, People

Population: 
  128,855,965 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.86% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  42.22 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  101.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  57.41 years 
male: 
  56.79 years 
female: 
  58.06 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.43 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Pakistani(s) 
adjective: 
  Pakistani 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Punjabi, Sindhi, Pashtun (Pathan), Baloch, Muhajir (immigrants from
  India and their descendents)
Religions: 
  Muslim 97% (Sunni 77%, Shi'a 20%), Christian, Hindu, and other 3% 
Languages: 
  Urdu (official), English (official; lingua franca of Pakistani elite
  and most government ministries), Punjabi 64%, Sindhi 12%, Pashtu 8%,
  Urdu 7%, Balochi and other 9% 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  35% 
male: 
  47% 
female: 
  21% 
Labor force: 
  28.9 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 54%, mining and manufacturing 13%, services 33%, extensive
  export of labor (1987 est.)

@Pakistan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
conventional short form: 
  Pakistan 
former: 
  West Pakistan 
Digraph: 
  PK
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Islamabad 
Administrative divisions: 
  4 provinces, 1 territory*, and 1 capital territory**; Balochistan,
  Federally Administered Tribal Areas*, Islamabad Capital Territory**,
  North-West Frontier, Punjab, Sindh
note: 
  the Pakistani-administered portion of the disputed Jammu and Kashmir
  region includes Azad Kashmir and the Northern Areas
Independence: 
  14 August 1947 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Pakistan Day, 23 March (1956) (proclamation of the republic)
Constitution: 
  10 April 1973, suspended 5 July 1977 restored with amendments, 30
  December 1985
Legal system: 
  based on English common law with provisions to accommodate Pakistan's
  stature as an Islamic state; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal; separate electorates and reserved
  parliamentary seats for non-Muslims
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Sardar Farooq LEGHARI election last held on 13 November 1993
  (next to be held no later than 14 October 1998); results - LEGHARI was
  elected by Parliament and the four provincial assemblies
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Benazir BHUTTO 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament (Majlis-e-Shoora)
Senate: 
  elections last held NA March 1994 (next to be held NA March 1997);
  results - seats (87 total) Pakistan People's Party (PPP) 22, Pakistan
  Muslim League, Nawaz Sharif faction (PML/N) 17; Tribal Area
  Representatives (nonparty) 8, Awami National Party (ANP) 6, Pakistan
  Muslim League, Junejo faction (PML/J) 5, Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP) 5,
  Mohajir Quami Movement, Altaf faction (MQM/A) 5, Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam,
  Fazlur Rehman group (JUI/F) 2, Pakhtun Khwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP)
  2, Jamaat-i-Islami (JI) 2, National People's Party (NPP) 2,
  Balochistan National Movement, Hayee Group (BNM/H) 1, Balochistan
  National Movement, Mengal Group (BNM/M) 1, Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan,
  Niazi faction (JUP/NI) 1, Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan, Noorani faction
  (JUP/NO) 1, Jamiat-al-Hadith (JAH) 1, Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam,
  Sami-ul-Haq faction (JUI/S) 1, Pakistan Muslim League, Functional
  Group (PML/F) 1, Pakistan National Party (PNP) 1, independents 2,
  vacant 1
National Assembly: 
  elections last held 6 October 1993 (next to be held by October 1998);
  results - seats (217 total); Pakistan People's Party (PPP) 92;
  Pakistan Muslim League, Nawaz Sharif faction (PML/N) 75; Pakistan
  Muslim League, Junejo faction (PML/J) 6; Islami-Jamhoori-Mahaz
  (IJM-Islamic Democratic Front) 4; Awami National Party (ANP) 3;
  Pakhtun Khwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP) 4; Pakistan Islamic Front (PIF)
  3; Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP) 2; Mutaheda Deeni Mahaz (MDM) 2;
  Balochistan National Movement, Hayee Group (BNM/H) 1; Balochistan
  National Movement, Mengal Group (BNM/M) 1; National Democratic
  Alliance (NDA) 1; National People's Party (NPP) 1; Pakhtun Quami Party
  (PKQP) 1; Religious minorities 10 reserved seats; independents, 9;
  results pending, 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Federal Islamic (Shari'at) Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
government: 
  Pakistan People's Party (PPP), Benazir BHUTTO; Pakistan Muslim League,
  Junejo faction (PML/J), Hamid Nasir CHATTHA; National People's Party
  (NPP), Ghulam Mustapha JATOI; Pakhtun Khwa Milli Awami Party (PKMAP),
  Mahmood Khan ACHAKZAI; Balochistan National Movement, Hayee Group
  (BNM/H), Dr. HAYEE Baluch; National Democratic Alliance (NDA), Maulana
  Kausar NIAZI; Pakhtun Quami Party (PKQP), Mohammed AFZAL Khan;
  Jamhoori Watan Party (JWP), Akbar Khan BUGTI
opposition: 
  Pakistan Muslim League, Nawaz Sharif faction (PML/N), Nawaz SHARIF;
  Awami National Party (ANP), Khan Abdul WALI KHAN; Pakistan Islamic
  Front (PIF), Qazi Hussain AHMED; Balochistan National Movement, Mengal
  Group (BNM/M), Sardar Akhtar MENGAL; Mohajir Quami Movement, Altaf
  faction (MQM/A); Jamaat-i-Islami (JI); Jamiat-al-Hadith (JAH)
frequently shifting: 
  Mutaheda Deeni Mahaz (MDM), Maulana Sami-ul-HAQ, the MDM includes
  Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan, Niazi faction (JUP/NI) and Anjuman
  Sepah-i-Sahaba Pakistan (ASSP); Islami-Jamhoori-Mahaz (IJM-Islamic
  Democratic Party), the IJM includes Jamiat Ulema-i-Islami, Fazlur
  Rehman group (JUI/F); Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan, Noorani faction
  (JUP/NO); Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam, Sami-ul-Haq faction (JUI/S); Pakistan
  Muslim League, Functional Group (PML/F); Pakistan National Party (PNP)
note: 
  most Pakistani political groups are motivated primarily by opportunism
  and political alliances can shift frequently
Other political or pressure groups: 
  military remains important political force; ulema (clergy),
  landowners, industrialists, and small merchants also influential
Member of: 
  AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAS
  (observer), OIC, PCA, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
  UNOSOM, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Maleeha LODHI 
chancery: 
  2315 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-6205 
FAX: 
  (202) 387-0484 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John MONJO 
embassy: 
  Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5, Islamabad 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1048, PSC 1212, Box 2000, Unit 6220,Islamabad or APO AE
  09812-2000 
telephone: 
  [92] (51) 826161 through 79 
FAX: 
  [92] (51) 214222 
consulate(s) general: 
  Karachi, Lahore 
consulate(s): 
  Peshawar 
Flag: 
  green with a vertical white band (symbolizing the role of religious
  minorities) on the hoist side; a large white crescent and star are
  centered in the green field; the crescent, star, and color green are
  traditional symbols of Islam

@Pakistan, Economy

Overview: 
  Pakistan is a poor Third World country faced with the usual problems
  of rapidly increasing population, sizable government deficits, and
  heavy dependence on foreign aid. In addition, the economy must support
  a large military establishment. Rapid economic growth, averaging 5%-6%
  over the past decade has helped Pakistan cope with these problems.
  However, growth slumped to 3% in FY93 because of severe flooding,
  which damaged the key export crop, cotton. Almost all agriculture and
  small-scale industry is in private hands. In 1990, Pakistan embarked
  on a sweeping economic liberalization program to boost foreign and
  domestic private investment and lower foreign aid dependence. The
  SHARIF government denationalized several state-owned firms and
  attracted some foreign investment. Pakistan likely will have
  difficulty raising living standards because of its rapidly expanding
  population. At the current rate of growth, population would double in
  25 years.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $239 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (FY93 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  12.7% (FY91)
Unemployment rate: 
  10% (FY91 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $9.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $10.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.1 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $6.8 billion (f.o.b., FY92)
commodities: 
  cotton, textiles, clothing, rice, leather, carpets
partners: 
  US, Japan, Hong Kong, Germany, UK
Imports: 
  $9.1 billion (f.o.b., FY92)
commodities: 
  petroleum, petroleum products, machinery, transportation equipment,
  vegetable oils, animal fats, chemicals
partners: 
  Japan, US, Germany, UK, Saudi Arabia
External debt: 
  $24 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7.3% (FY92); accounts for 23% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,000,000 kW
production: 
  43 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  350 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, food processing, beverages, construction materials,
  clothing, paper products, shrimp
Agriculture: 
  22% of GDP, over 50% of labor force; world's largest contiguous
  irrigation system; major crops - cotton, wheat, rice, sugarcane,
  fruits, vegetables; livestock products - milk, beef, mutton, eggs;
  self-sufficient in food grain
Illicit drugs: 
  major illicit producer of opium and hashish for the international drug
  trade; despite some success in reducing cultivation, remains world's
  fourth largest opium producer (140 metric tons in 1993)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $4.5 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1980-89), $91
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $2.3 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $3.2 billion 
note: 
  including Bangladesh prior to 1972
Currency: 
  1 Pakistani rupee (PRe) = 100 paisa
Exchange rates: 
  Pakistani rupees (PRs) per US$1 - 30.214 (January 1994), 28.107
  (1993), 25.083 (1992), 23.801 (1991), 21.707 (1990), 20.541 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Pakistan, Communications

Railroads: 
  8,773 km total; 7,718 km broad gauge, 445 km 1-meter gauge, and 610 km
  less than 1-meter gauge; 1,037 km broad-gauge double track; 286 km
  electrified; all government owned (1985)
Highways: 
total: 
  110,677 km 
paved: 
  58,677 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 23,000 km; improved earth 29,000 km (1988)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 885 km; natural gas 4,044 km
  (1987)
Ports: 
  Gwadar, Karachi, Port Muhammad bin Qasim
Merchant marine: 
  30 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 352,189 GRT/532,782 DWT, bulk 1,
  cargo 25, oil tanker 1, passenger-cargo 3 
Airports: 
total: 
  110 
usable: 
  104 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  75 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  30 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  43 
Telecommunications: 
  the domestic telephone system is poor, adequate only for government
  and business use; about 7 telephones per 1,000 persons; the system for
  international traffic is better and employs both microwave radio relay
  and satellites; satellite ground stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  and 2 Indian Ocean INTELSAT; broadcast stations - 19 AM, 8 FM, 29 TV

@Pakistan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Civil Armed Forces, National Guard,
  paramilitary/security forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 29,548,746; fit for military service 18,134,013; reach
  military age (17) annually 1,391,258 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $3.0 billion, 5.7% of GNP (FY93/94)


@Palmyra Atoll

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Palmyra Atoll, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 1,600 km
  south-southwest of Honolulu, almost halfway between Hawaii and
  American Samoa
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  11.9 sq km 
land area: 
  11.9 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 20 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  14.5 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  equatorial, hot, and very rainy
Terrain: 
  low, with maximum elevations of about 2 meters
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  100% 
other: 
  0% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  about 50 islets covered with dense vegetation, coconut trees, and
  balsa-like trees up to 30 meters tall

@Palmyra Atoll, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Palmyra Atoll, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Palmyra Atoll 
Digraph: 
  LQ
Type: 
  incorporated territory of the US; privately owned, but administered by
  the Office of Territorial and International Affairs, US Department of
  the Interior
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC

@Palmyra Atoll, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Palmyra Atoll, Communications

Ports: 
  the main harbor is West Lagoon, which is entered by a channel on the
  southwest side of the atoll; both the channel and harbor will
  accommodate vessels drawing 6 meters of water; much of the road and
  many causeways built during the war are unserviceable and overgrown
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 

@Palmyra Atoll, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Panama, Geography

Location: 
  Middle America, between Colombia and Costa Rica
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  78,200 sq km 
land area: 
  75,990 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than South Carolina
Land boundaries: 
  total 555 km, Colombia 225 km, Costa Rica 330 km 
Coastline: 
  2,490 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid, cloudy; prolonged rainy season (May to January),
  short dry season (January to May)
Terrain: 
  interior mostly steep, rugged mountains and dissected, upland plains;
  coastal areas largely plains and rolling hills
Natural resources: 
  copper, mahogany forests, shrimp 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  15% 
forest and woodland: 
  54% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  320 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from agricultural runoff threatens fishery resources;
  deforestation of tropical rain forest; land degradation
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  strategic location on eastern end of isthmus forming land bridge
  connecting North and South America; controls Panama Canal that links
  North Atlantic Ocean via Caribbean Sea with North Pacific Ocean

@Panama, People

Population: 
  2.63 million (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.94% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.61 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.87 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.37 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  16.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.88 years 
male: 
  72.28 years 
female: 
  77.62 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.85 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Panamanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Panamanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo (mixed Indian and European ancestry) 70%, West Indian 14%,
  white 10%, Indian 6% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant 15% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), English 14% 
note: 
  many Panamanians bilingual
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  88% 
male: 
  88% 
female: 
  88% 
Labor force: 
  921,000 (1992 est.)
by occupation: 
  government and community services 31.8%, agriculture, hunting, and
  fishing 26.8%, commerce, restaurants, and hotels 16.4%, manufacturing
  and mining 9.4%, construction 3.2%, transportation and communications
  6.2%, finance, insurance, and real estate 4.3%
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor, but an oversupply of unskilled labor

@Panama, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Panama 
conventional short form: 
  Panama 
local long form: 
  Republica de Panama 
local short form: 
  Panama 
Digraph: 
  PM
Type: 
  constitutional  republic 
Capital: 
  Panama 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia) and 1 territory*
  (comarca); Bocas del Toro, Chiriqui, Cocle, Colon, Darien, Herrera,
  Los Santos, Panama, San Blas*, Veraguas
Independence: 
  3 November 1903 (from Colombia; became independent from Spain 28
  November 1821)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 3 November (1903) 
Constitution: 
  11 October 1972; major reforms adopted April 1983
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts in the
  Supreme Court of Justice; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Guillermo ENDARA (since 20 December 1989, elected 7 May
  1989); First Vice President Guillermo FORD Boyd (since 24 December
  1992); Second Vice President (vacant); election last held on 7 May
  1989, annulled but later upheld; results - anti-NORIEGA coalition
  believed to have won about 75% of the total votes cast
note: 
  a presidential election was held 8 May 1994 (next election to held on
  9 May 1999) with inauguration of the successful candidates to take
  place on 1 September 1994; results - President Ernesto PEREZ
  BALLADARES Gonzales, First Vice President Tomas Altamirano DUQUE, and
  Second Vice President Felipe VIRZI were elected; percent of vote for
  president - BALLADARES 33%, DE GRUBER 29%, BLADES 17%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Asamblea Nacional): 
  elections held on 27 January 1991; results - percent of vote by party
  NA; seats - (67 total)
progovernment parties: 
  PDC 28, MOLIRENA 15, PA 8, PLA 4
opposition parties: 
  PRD 10, PALA 1, PL 1; note - the PDC went into opposition after
  President Guillermo ENDARA ousted the PDC from the coalition
  government in April 1991; an election of members of the National
  Assembly was held on 8 May 1994 (next election to be held on 9 May
  1999) and they will take their seats on 1 September 1994; results -
  percent of vote and seats won by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia), 5 superior
  courts, 3 courts of appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
government alliance: 
  Nationalist Republican Liberal Movement (MOLIRENA), Alfredo RAMIREZ;
  Authentic Liberal Party (PLA), Arnulfo ESCALONA; Arnulfista Party
  (PA), Mireya MOSCOSO DE GRUBER
other parties: 
  Christian Democratic Party (PDC), Raul OSSA; Democratic Revolutionary
  Party (PRD), Gerardo GONZALEZ; Agrarian Labor Party (PALA), Nestor
  Tomas GUERRA; Liberal Party (PL), Roberto ALEMAN Zubieta; Doctrinaire
  Panamenista Party (PPD), Jose Salvador MUNOZ; Papa Egoro Movement,
  Ruben BLADES; Civic Renewal Party (PRC), Tomas HERRERA; National
  Integration Movement (MINA), Arrigo GUARDIA; National Unity Mission
  Party (MUN), Jose Manuel PAREDES; Solidarity Party (CPS), Samuel LEWIS
  GALINDO
note: 
  following the elections of 8 May 1994 the following realignment of
  political parties took place
governing coalition: 
  Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), Gerardo GONZALEZ; Liberal
  Republican Party (PLR), Rodolfo CHIARI; Labor Party (PALA), Carlos
  Lopez GUEVARA; Solidarity Party (PS),Samuel LEWIS GALINDO
other parties: 
  Nationalist Republican Liberal Movement (MOLIRENA), Alfredo RAMIREZ;
  Authentic Liberal Party (PLA), Arnulfo ESCOLONA; Arnulfista Party
  (PA), Mireya Moscoso DE GRUBER; Christian Democratic Party (PDC), Raul
  OSSA; Liberal Party (PL), Roberto ALEMAN Zubieta; Papa Egoro Movement,
  Ruben BLADES; Civic Renewal Party (PRC), Tomas HERRERA; National Unity
  Mission Party (MUN), Jose Manuel PAREDES
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Council of Organized Workers (CONATO); National Council of
  Private Enterprise (CONEP); Panamanian Association of Business
  Executives (APEDE); National Civic Crusade; Chamber of Commerce;
  Panamanian Industrialists Society (SIP); Workers Confederation of the
  Republic of Panama (CTRP)
Member of: 
  AG (associate), CG, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jaime FORD Boyd (to be replaced by Ambassador Ricardo
  Alberto ARIAS on 1 September 1994) 
chancery: 
  2862 McGill Terrace NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-1407 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, San
  Juan (Puerto Rico), Tampa, 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
embassy: 
  Avenida Balboa and Calle 38, Apartado 6959, Panama City 5 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy Panama, Unit 0945; APO AA 34002 
telephone: 
  (507) 27-1777 
FAX: 
  (507) 27-1964 
Flag: 
  divided into four, equal rectangles; the top quadrants are white
  (hoist side) with a blue five-pointed star in the center and plain
  red, the bottom quadrants are plain blue (hoist side) and white with a
  red five-pointed star in the center

@Panama, Economy

Overview: 
  GDP expanded by roughly 5.9% in 1993, following growth of 8% in 1992;
  banking and financial services led the way in 1993. The economy thus
  continues to recover from the crisis that preceded the ouster of
  Manuel NORIEGA, even though the government's structural adjustment
  program has been hampered by a lack of popular support and a passive
  administration. Public investment has been limited as the
  administration has kept the fiscal deficit below 2% of GDP.
  Unemployment and economic reform are the two major issues the new
  government must face in 1994-95.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $11.6 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5.9% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  12.5% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $200 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $545 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  bananas 43%, shrimp 11%, sugar 4%, clothing 5%, coffee 2%
partners: 
  US 38%, EC, Central America and Caribbean
Imports: 
  $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  capital goods 21%, crude oil 11%, foodstuffs 9%, consumer goods,
  chemicals
partners: 
  US 35%, EC, Central America and Caribbean, Japan
External debt: 
  $6.1 billion (year-end 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7% (1993 est.); accounts for about 9% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,584,000 kW
production: 
  4.36 trillion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  720 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  manufacturing and construction activities, petroleum refining,
  brewing, cement and other construction material, sugar milling
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 10% of GDP (1992 est.), 27% of labor force (1992); crops
  - bananas, rice, corn, coffee, sugarcane; livestock; fishing; importer
  of food grain, vegetables
Illicit drugs: 
  major cocaine transshipment point and drug money laundering center
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $516 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $582
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $4 million 
Currency: 
  1 balboa (B) = 100 centesimos
Exchange rates: 
  balboas (B) per US$1 - 1.000 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Panama, Communications

Railroads: 
  238 km total; 78 km 1.524-meter gauge, 160 km 0.914-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  8,530 km 
paved: 
  2,745 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 3,270 km; improved, unimproved earth 2,515 km 
Inland waterways: 
  800 km navigable by shallow draft vessels; 82 km Panama Canal
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 130 km 
Ports: 
  Cristobal, Balboa, Colon
Merchant marine: 
  3,405 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 56,011,824 GRT/89,516,566
  DWT, barge carrier 1, bulk 717, cargo 1,110, chemical tanker 181,
  combination bulk 31, combination ore/oil 24, container 215, liquefied
  gas 127, livestock carrier 9, multifunction large-load carrier 5, oil
  tanker 437, passenger 22, passenger-cargo 3, refrigerated cargo 287,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 67, short-sea passenger 30, specialized tanker
  10, vehicle carrier 129 
note: 
  all but 30 are foreign owned and operated; the top 4 foreign owners
  are Japan 34%, Greece 8%, Hong Kong 7%, and Taiwan 5%; other foreign
  owners include China at least 144 ships, Vietnam 3, Croatia 6, Cuba 4,
  Cyprus 4, and Russia 41
Airports: 
total: 
  118 
usable: 
  109 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  38 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  15 
Telecommunications: 
  domestic and international facilities well developed; connection into
  Central American Microwave System; 220,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 91 AM, no FM, 23 TV; 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite
  ground stations - 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT

@Panama, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Panamanian Public Forces (PPF) includes the National Police, Maritime
  Service, National Air Service, Institutional Protective Service;
  Judicial Technical Police operate under the control of Panama's
  judicial branch
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 686,479; fit for military service 471,780 
Defense expenditures: 
  expenditures for the Panamanian security forces amounted to $138.5
  million, 1.0% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Papua New Guinea, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, just north of Australia, between Indonesia and the
  Solomon Islands
Map references: 
  Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  461,690 sq km 
land area: 
  451,710 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 820 km, Indonesia 820 km 
Coastline: 
  5,152 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; northwest monsoon (December to March), southeast monsoon
  (May to October); slight seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with coastal lowlands and rolling foothills
Natural resources: 
  gold, copper, silver, natural gas, timber, oil potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  71% 
other: 
  28% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; pollution from mining projects
natural hazards: 
  some active volcanoes; frequent earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber; signed, but
  not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  shares island of New Guinea with Indonesia; one of world's largest
  swamps along southwest coast

@Papua New Guinea, People

Population: 
  4,196,806 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.31% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  33.5 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.38 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  63.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  56.43 years 
male: 
  55.6 years 
female: 
  57.31 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.65 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Papua New Guinean(s) 
adjective: 
  Papua New Guinean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Melanesian, Papuan, Negrito, Micronesian, Polynesian 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 22%, Lutheran 16%, Presbyterian/Methodist/London
  Missionary Society 8%, Anglican 5%, Evangelical Alliance 4%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist 1%, other Protestant sects 10%, indigenous
  beliefs 34% 
Languages: 
  English spoken by 1-2%, pidgin English widespread, Motu spoken in
  Papua region
note: 
  715 indigenous languages
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  52% 
male: 
  65% 
female: 
  38% 
Labor force: 
  NA

@Papua New Guinea, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Independent State of Papua New Guinea 
conventional short form: 
  Papua New Guinea 
Digraph: 
  PP
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Port Moresby 
Administrative divisions: 
  20 provinces; Central, Chimbu, Eastern Highlands, East New Britain,
  East Sepik, Enga, Gulf, Madang, Manus, Milne Bay, Morobe, National
  Capital, New Ireland, Northern, North Solomons, Sandaun, Southern
  Highlands, Western, Western Highlands, West New Britain
Independence: 
  16 September 1975 (from UN trusteeship under Australian
  administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 16 September (1975) 
Constitution: 
  16 September 1975
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Wiwa KOROWI (since NA November 1991) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Paias WINGTI (since 17 July 1992); Deputy Prime
  Minister Sir Julius CHAN (since July 1992) 
cabinet: 
  National Executive Council; appointed by the governor on
  recommendation of the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Parliament: 
  (sometimes referred to as the House of Assembly) elections last held
  13-26 June 1992 (next to be held NA 1997); results - percent by party
  NA; seats - (109 total) Pangu Party 24, PDM 17, PPP 10, PAP 10,
  independents 30, others 18 (association with political parties is
  fluid)
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Papua New Guinea United Party (Pangu Party), Jack GENIA; People's
  Democratic Movement (PDM), Paias WINGTI; People's Action Party (PAP),
  Akoka DOI; People's Progress Party (PPP), Sir Julius CHAN; United
  Party (UP), Paul TORATO; Papua Party (PP), Galeva KWARARA; National
  Party (NP), Paul PORA; Melanesian Alliance (MA), Fr. John MOMIS
Member of: 
  ACP, APEC, AsDB, ASEAN (observer), C, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Kepas WATANGIA 
chancery: 
  3rd floor, 1615 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 745-3680 
FAX: 
  (202) 745-3679 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard TEARE 
embassy: 
  Armit Street, Port Moresby 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1492, Port Moresby, or APO AE 96553 
telephone: 
  [675] 211-455 or 594, 654 
FAX: 
  [675] 213-423 
Flag: 
  divided diagonally from upper hoist-side corner; the upper triangle is
  red with a soaring yellow bird of paradise centered; the lower
  triangle is black with five white five-pointed stars of the Southern
  Cross constellation centered

@Papua New Guinea, Economy

Overview: 
  Papua New Guinea is richly endowed with natural resources, but
  exploitation has been hampered by the rugged terrain and the high cost
  of developing an infrastructure. Agriculture provides a subsistence
  livelihood for 85% of the population. Mining of numerous deposits,
  including copper and gold, accounts for about 60% of export earnings.
  Budgetary support from Australia and development aid under World Bank
  auspices have helped sustain the economy. Robust growth in 1991-92 was
  led by the mining sector; the opening of a large new gold mine helped
  the advance. The economy remained strong in 1993, primarily because of
  continued growth in the mining and oil sectors.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $8.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.5% (1992-93)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.33 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.49 billion, including capital expenditures of $225 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  gold, copper ore, oil, logs, palm oil, coffee, cocoa, lobster
partners: 
  Australia, Japan, South Korea, UK, US
Imports: 
  $1.6 billion (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods, food, fuels,
  chemicals
partners: 
  Australia, Japan, US, Singapore, New Zealand, UK
External debt: 
  $2.2 billion (April 1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 21% (1992); accounts for 31% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  400,000 kW
production: 
  1.6 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  400 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  copra crushing, palm oil processing, plywood production, wood chip
  production, mining of gold, silver, and copper, construction, tourism
Agriculture: 
  Accounts for 28% of GDP; livelihood for 85% of population; fertile
  soils and favorable climate permits cultivating a wide variety of
  crops; cash crops - coffee, cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels; other
  products - tea, rubber, sweet potatoes, fruit, vegetables, poultry,
  pork; net importer of food for urban centers
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $40.6 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $6.5
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $17 million 
Currency: 
  1 kina (K) = 100 toea
Exchange rates: 
  kina (K) per US$1 - 1.0281 (January 1994), 1.0221 (1993), 1.0367
  (1992), 1.0504 (1991), 1.0467 (1990), 1.1685 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Papua New Guinea, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  19,200 km 
paved: 
  640 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 10,960 km; unimproved earth
  7,600 km 
Inland waterways: 
  10,940 km
Ports: 
  Anewa Bay, Lae, Madang, Port Moresby, Rabaul
Merchant marine: 
  11 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 21,337 GRT/25,669 DWT, bulk 2,
  cargo 3, combination ore/oil 5, container 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  504 
usable: 
  462 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  18 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  39 
Telecommunications: 
  services are adequate and being improved; facilities provide
  radiobroadcast, radiotelephone and telegraph, coastal radio,
  aeronautical radio, and international radiocommunication services;
  submarine cables extend to Australia and Guam; more than 70,000
  telephones (1987); broadcast stations - 31 AM, 2 FM, 2 TV (1987); 1
  Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Papua New Guinea, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Papua New Guinea Defense Force (including Army, Navy, Air Force)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,080,316; fit for military service 601,369 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $55 million, 1.8% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Paracel Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, 400 km east of Vietnam in the South China Sea,
  about one-third of the way between Vietnam and the Philippines
Map references: 
  Asia 
Area: 
total area: 
  NA sq km 
land area: 
  NA sq km 
comparative area: 
  NA 
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  518 km 
Maritime claims: 
  NA
International disputes: 
  occupied by China, but claimed by Taiwan and Vietnam
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  NA
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Paracel Islands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are scattered Chinese
  garrisons

@Paracel Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Paracel Islands 
Digraph: 
  PF

@Paracel Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Paracel Islands, Communications

Ports: 
  small Chinese port facilities on Woody Island and Duncan Island
  currently under expansion
Airports: 
  1 on Woody Island

@Paracel Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  occupied by China


@Paraguay, Geography

Location: 
  Central South America, between Argentina and Brazil
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  406,750 sq km 
land area: 
  397,300 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,920 km, Argentina 1,880 km, Bolivia 750 km, Brazil 1,290 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  short section of the boundary with Brazil, just west of Salto del
  Guaira (Guaira Falls) on the Rio Parana, has not been determined
Climate: 
  varies from temperate in east to semiarid in far west
Terrain: 
  grassy plains and wooded hills east of Rio Paraguay; Gran Chaco region
  west of Rio Paraguay mostly low, marshy plain near the river, and dry
  forest and thorny scrub elsewhere
Natural resources: 
  hydropower, timber, iron ore, manganese, limestone 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  39% 
forest and woodland: 
  35% 
other: 
  5% 
Irrigated land: 
  670 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; water pollution; inadequate means for waste disposal
  present health hazards for many urban residents
natural hazards: 
  local flooding in southeast (early September to June); poorly drained
  plains may become boggy (early October to June)
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea; signed, but not ratified - Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  landlocked; buffer between Argentina and Brazil

@Paraguay, People

Population: 
  5,213,772 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.76% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.03 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.48 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  25.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.28 years 
male: 
  71.74 years 
female: 
  74.9 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.29 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Paraguayan(s) 
adjective: 
  Paraguayan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo (Spanish and Indian) 95%, white and Indian 5% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 90%, Mennonite and other Protestant denominations 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), Guarani 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  90% 
male: 
  92% 
female: 
  88% 
Labor force: 
  1.692 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture, industry and commerce, services, government (1986)

@Paraguay, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Paraguay 
conventional short form: 
  Paraguay 
local long form: 
  Republica del Paraguay 
local short form: 
  Paraguay 
Digraph: 
  PA
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Asuncion 
Administrative divisions: 
  19 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Alto
  Paraguay, Alto Parana, Amambay, Boqueron, Caaguazu, Caazapa,
  Canindeyu, Central, Chaco, Concepcion, Cordillera, Guaira, Itapua,
  Misiones, Neembucu, Nueva Asuncion, Paraguari, Presidente Hayes, San
  Pedro
Independence: 
  14 May 1811 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Days, 14-15 May (1811) 
Constitution: 
  25 August 1967; Constituent Assembly rewrote the Constitution that was
  promulgated on 20 June 1992
Legal system: 
  based on Argentine codes, Roman law, and French codes; judicial review
  of legislative acts in Supreme Court of Justice; does not accept
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory up to age 60
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Juan Carlos WASMOSY (since 15 August 1993); Vice President
  Roberto Angel SEIFART (since 15 August 1993); election last held 9 May
  1993 (next to be held May 1998); results - Juan Carlos WASMOSY 40.09%,
  Domingo LAINO 32.06%, Guillermo CABALLERO VARGAS 23.04%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; nominated by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Congress (Congreso)
Chamber of Senators (Camara de Senadores): 
  elections last held 9 May 1993 (next to be held May 1998); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (45 total) Colorado Party 20,
  PLRA 17, EN 8
Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados): 
  elections last held on 9 May 1993 (next to be held by May 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (80 total) Colorado
  Party 38, PLRA 33, EN 9
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Colorado Party, Eugenio SANABRIA CANTERO, president; Authentic Radical
  Liberal Party (PLRA), Domingo LAINO; National Encounter (EN),
  Guillermo CABALLERO VARGAS (the EN party includes the following minor
  parties: Christian Democratic Party (PDC), Jose Angel BURRO;
  Febrerista Revolutionary Party (PRF), Euclides ACEVEDO; Popular
  Democratic Party (PDP), Hugo RICHER)
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Confederation of Workers (CUT); Roman Catholic Church
Member of: 
  AG (observer), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, MERCOSUR, OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Juan Esteban AGUIRRE Martinez 
chancery: 
  2400 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-6960 through 6962 
FAX: 
  (202) 234-4508 
consulate(s) general: 
  New Orleans and New York 
consulate(s): 
  Miami 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge D'Affaires Gerald McCOLLOCH 
embassy: 
  1776 Avenida Mariscal Lopez, Asuncion 
mailing address: 
  C. P. 402, Asuncion, or APO AA 34036-0001 
telephone: 
  [595] (21) 213-715 
FAX: 
  [595] (21) 213-728 
Flag: 
  three equal, horizontal bands of red (top), white, and blue with an
  emblem centered in the white band; unusual flag in that the emblem is
  different on each side; the obverse (hoist side at the left) bears the
  national coat of arms (a yellow five-pointed star within a green
  wreath capped by the words REPUBLICA DEL PARAGUAY, all within two
  circles); the reverse (hoist side at the right) bears the seal of the
  treasury (a yellow lion below a red Cap of Liberty and the words Paz y
  Justicia (Peace and Justice) capped by the words REPUBLICA DEL
  PARAGUAY, all within two circles)

@Paraguay, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture, including forestry, accounts for about 25% of GDP,
  employs about 45% of the labor force, and provides the bulk of
  exports, led by soybeans and cotton. Paraguay lacks substantial
  mineral or petroleum resources but possesses a large hydropower
  potential. Since 1981 economic performance has declined compared with
  the boom period of 1976-81, when real GDP grew at an average annual
  rate of nearly 11%. During the period 1982-86 real GDP fell in three
  of five years, inflation jumped to an annual rate of 32%, and foreign
  debt rose. Factors responsible for the erratic behavior of the economy
  were the completion of the Itaipu hydroelectric dam, bad weather for
  crops, and weak export prices for agricultural commodities. In 1987
  the economy experienced a minor recovery because of improved weather
  conditions and stronger international prices for key agricultural
  exports. The recovery continued through 1990, on the strength of
  bumper crops in 1988-89. In a major step to increase its economic
  activity in the region, Paraguay in March 1991 joined the Southern
  Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR), which includes Brazil, Argentina, and
  Uruguay. In 1992, the government, through an unorthodox approach,
  reduced external debt with both commercial and official creditors by
  purchasing a sizable amount of the delinquent commercial debt in the
  secondary market at a substantial discount. The government had paid
  100% of remaining official debt arrears to the US, Germany, France,
  and Spain. All commercial debt arrears have been rescheduled. For the
  long run, the government must press forward with general,
  market-oriented economic reforms. Growth of 3.5% in 1993 was spurred
  by higher-than-expected agricultural output and rising international
  commodity prices. Inflation picked up steam in fourth quarter 1993
  because of rises in public sector salaries and utility rates.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent  - $15.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  20.4% (1993 )
Unemployment rate: 
  11% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $487 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $728 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  cotton, soybean, timber, vegetable oils, meat products, coffee, tung
  oil
partners: 
  EC 37%, Brazil 25%, Argentina 10%, Chile 6%, US 6%
Imports: 
  $1.38 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  capital goods, foodstuffs, consumer goods, raw materials, fuels
partners: 
  Brazil 30%, EC 20%, US 18%, Argentina 8%, Japan 7%
External debt: 
  $1.2 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.2% (1991 est.); accounts for 20% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,257,000 kW
production: 
  16.2 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,280 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  meat packing, oilseed crushing, milling, brewing, textiles, other
  light consumer goods, cement, construction
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 26% of GDP and 44% of labor force; cash crops - cotton,
  sugarcane, soybeans; other crops - corn, wheat, tobacco, cassava,
  fruits, vegetables; animal products - beef, pork, eggs, milk; surplus
  producer of timber; self-sufficient in most foods
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug trade;
  important transshipment point for Bolivian cocaine headed for the US
  and Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $172 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.1
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 guarani (G) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates: 
  guaranies (G) per US$ - 1,861.3 (January 1994), 1,744.3 (1993),
  1,500.3 (1992), 447.5 (March 1992), 1,325.2 (1991), 1,229.8 (1990),
  1,056.2 (1989), 550.00 (fixed rate 1986-February 1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Paraguay, Communications

Railroads: 
  970 km total; 440 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, 60 km 1.000-meter
  gauge, 470 km various narrow gauge (privately owned)
Highways: 
total: 
  28,300 km 
paved: 
  2,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 500 km; earth 25,200 km 
Inland waterways: 
  3,100 km
Ports: 
  Asuncion, Villeta, Ciudad del Este
Merchant marine: 
  13 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 16,747 GRT/19,513 DWT, cargo 11,
  oil tanker 2 
note: 
  1 naval cargo ship is sometimes used commercially
Airports: 
total: 
  969 
usable: 
  827 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  7 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  93 
Telecommunications: 
  meager telephone service; principal switching center in Asuncion; fair
  intercity microwave net; 78,300 telephones; telephone density - 16
  telephones per 1,000 persons; broadcast stations - 40 AM, no FM, 5 TV,
  7 shortwave; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Paraguay, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Naval Air and Marines), Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,249,470; fit for military service 907,533; reach
  military age (17) annually 53,126 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $100 million, 1.6% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Peru, Geography

Location: 
  Western South America, bordering the South Pacific Ocean between Chile
  and Ecuador
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,285,220 sq km 
land area: 
  1.28 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Alaska
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,940 km, Bolivia 900 km, Brazil 1,560 km, Chile 160 km,
  Colombia 2,900 km, Ecuador 1,420 km 
Coastline: 
  2,414 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  three sections of the boundary with Ecuador are in dispute
Climate: 
  varies from tropical in east to dry desert in west
Terrain: 
  western coastal plain (costa), high and rugged Andes in center
  (sierra), eastern lowland jungle of Amazon Basin (selva)
Natural resources: 
  copper, silver, gold, petroleum, timber, fish, iron ore, coal,
  phosphate, potash 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  21% 
forest and woodland: 
  55% 
other: 
  21% 
Irrigated land: 
  12,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification; air
  pollution in Lima
natural hazards: 
  subject to earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides, mild volcanic activity
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Tropical Timber
Note: 
  shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's highest navigable lake, with
  Bolivia

@Peru, People

Population: 
  23,650,671 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.86% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.55 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  54.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.62 years 
male: 
  63.44 years 
female: 
  67.9 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.11 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Peruvian(s) 
adjective: 
  Peruvian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Indian 45%, mestizo (mixed Indian and European ancestry) 37%, white
  15%, black, Japanese, Chinese, and other 3% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), Quechua (official), Aymara 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  85% 
male: 
  92% 
female: 
  29% 
Labor force: 
  8 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  government and other services 44%, agriculture 37%, industry 19% (1988
  est.)

@Peru, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Peru 
conventional short form: 
  Peru 
local long form: 
  Republica del Peru 
local short form: 
  Peru 
Digraph: 
  PE
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Lima 
Administrative divisions: 
  24 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento) and 1
  constitutional province* (provincia constitucional); Amazonas, Ancash,
  Apurimac, Arequipa, Ayacucho, Cajamarca, Callao*, Cusco, Huancavelica,
  Huanuco, Ica, Junin, La Libertad, Lambayeque, Lima, Loreto, Madre de
  Dios, Moquegua, Pasco, Piura, Puno, San Martin, Tacna, Tumbes, Ucayali
note: 
  the 1979 Constitution and legislation enacted from 1987 to 1990
  mandate the creation of regions (regiones, singular - region) intended
  to function eventually as autonomous economic and administrative
  entities; so far, 12 regions have been constituted from 23 existing
  departments - Amazonas (from Loreto), Andres Avelino Caceres (from
  Huanuco, Pasco, Junin), Arequipa (from Arequipa), Chavin (from
  Ancash), Grau (from Tumbes, Piura), Inca (from Cusco, Madre de Dios,
  Apurimac), La Libertad (from La Libertad), Los Libertadores-Huari
  (from Ica, Ayacucho, Huancavelica), Mariategui (from Moquegua, Tacna,
  Puno), Nor Oriental del Maranon (from Lambayeque, Cajamarca,
  Amazonas), San Martin (from San Martin), Ucayali (from Ucayali);
  formation of another region has been delayed by the reluctance of the
  constitutional province of Callao to merge with the department of
  Lima. Because of inadequate funding from the central government and
  organizational and political difficulties, the regions have yet to
  assume major responsibilities. The 1993 Constitution maintains the
  regionalization process with some modifications that will limit the
  powers of the regional governments. The new constitution also
  reaffirms the roles of departmental and municipal governments.
Independence: 
  28 July 1821 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 28 July (1821) 
Constitution: 
  31 December 1993
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Alberto Kenyo FUJIMORI Fujimori (since 28 July 1990);
  election last held on 10 June 1990 (next to be held NA April 1995);
  results - Alberto FUJIMORI 56.53%, Mario VARGAS Llosa 33.92%, other
  9.55%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
note: 
  Prime Minister Efrain GOLDENBERG Schreiber (since February 1994) does
  not exercise executive power; this power is in the hands of the
  president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD): 
  elections last held 25 November 1992 (next to be held April 1995);
  seats - (80 total) New Majority/Change 90 44, Popular Christian Party
  8, Independent Moralization Front 7, Renewal 6, Movement of the
  Democratic Left 4, Democratic Coordinator 4, others 7; note - several
  major parties (American Popular Revolutionary Alliance, Popular
  Action) did not participate; with the next election the congress will
  be expanded to 100 seats
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia) 
Political parties and leaders: 
note: 
  Peru's political party system has become fragmented in recent years
  with independent movements proliferating; key parties are listed
  New Majority/Change 90 (Cambio 90), Alberto FUJIMORI; Popular
  Christian Party (PPC), Luis BEDOYA Reyes; Popular Action Party (AP),
  Raul DIEZ CANSECO; American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA),
  Armando VILLANUEVA del CAMPO; Independent Moralizing Front (FIM),
  Fernando OLIVERA Vega; National Renewal, Rafael REY Rey; Democratic
  Coordinator, Jose BARBA Caballero; Democratic Left Movement, Henry
  PEASE; Solidarity and Democracy (SODE), Manuel MOREYRA; National Front
  of Workers and Peasants (FRENATRACA), Roger CACARES
Other political or pressure groups: 
  leftist guerrilla groups include Shining Path, Abimael GUZMAN Reynoso
  (imprisoned); Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, Nestor SERPA and
  Victor POLAY (imprisoned)
Member of: 
  AG, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, NAM,
  OAS, OPANAL, PCA, RG (suspended), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ricardo LUNA Mendoza 
chancery: 
  1700 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 833-9860 through 9869 
FAX: 
  (202) 659-8124 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, Paterson (New Jersey),
  and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Alvin P. ADAMS, Jr. 
embassy: 
  corner of Avenida Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and Avenida Espana, Lima 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1991, Lima 1, Unit 3822, or APO AA 34031 
telephone: 
  [51] (14) 33-8000 
FAX: 
  [51] (14) 31-6682 
Flag: 
  three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist side), white, and red with
  the coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of arms features
  a shield bearing a llama, cinchona tree (the source of quinine), and a
  yellow cornucopia spilling out gold coins, all framed by a green
  wreath

@Peru, Economy

Overview: 
  The Peruvian economy is becoming increasingly market oriented, with
  major privatizations scheduled for 1994 in the mining and
  telecommunications industries. In the 1980s the economy suffered from
  hyperinflation, declining per capita output, and mounting external
  debt. Peru was shut off from IMF and World Bank support in the
  mid-1980s because of its huge debt arrears. An austerity program
  implemented shortly after the FUJIMORI government took office in July
  1990 contributed to a third consecutive yearly contraction of economic
  activity, but the slide halted late that year, and output rose 2.4% in
  1991. After a burst of inflation as the austerity program eliminated
  government price subsidies, monthly price increases eased to the
  single-digit level and by December 1991 dropped to the lowest increase
  since mid-1987. Lima obtained a financial rescue package from
  multilateral lenders in September 1991, although it faced $14 billion
  in arrears on its external debt. By working with the IMF and World
  Bank on new financial conditions and arrangements, the government
  succeeded in ending its arrears by March 1993. In 1992, GDP fell by
  2.8%, in part because a warmer-than-usual El Nino current resulted in
  a 30% drop in the fish catch. In 1993 the economy rebounded as strong
  foreign investment helped push growth to 6%.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $70 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  39% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15%; underemployment 70% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $300 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $3.7 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  copper, zinc, fishmeal, crude petroleum and byproducts, lead, refined
  silver, coffee, cotton
partners: 
  US 25%, Japan 9%, Italy, Germany
Imports: 
  $4.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, transport equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum, iron and steel,
  chemicals, pharmaceuticals
partners: 
  US 30%, Colombia, Argentina, Japan, Germany, Brazil
External debt: 
  $22 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -5% (1992 est.); accounts for 32% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,042,000 kW
production: 
  17.434 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  760 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  mining of metals, petroleum, fishing, textiles, clothing, food
  processing, cement, auto assembly, steel, shipbuilding, metal
  fabrication
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 13% of GDP, about 35% of labor force; commercial crops -
  coffee, cotton, sugarcane; other crops - rice, wheat, potatoes,
  plantains, coca; animal products - poultry, red meats, dairy, wool;
  not self-sufficient in grain or vegetable oil; fish catch of 6.9
  million metric tons (1990)
Illicit drugs: 
  world's largest coca leaf producer with about 108,800 hectares under
  cultivation in 1993; source of supply for most of the world's coca
  paste and cocaine base; at least 85% of coca cultivation is for
  illicit production; most of cocaine base is shipped to Colombian drug
  dealers for processing into cocaine for the international drug market
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.7 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $4.3
  billion; Communist countries (1970-89), $577 million 
Currency: 
  1 nuevo sol (S/.) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates: 
  nuevo sol (S/.) per US$1 - 2.180 (January 1994), 1.988 (1993), 1.245
  (1992), 0.772 (1991), 0.187 (1990), 0.0027 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Peru, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,801 km total; 1,501 km 1.435-meter gauge, 300 km 0.914-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  69,942 km 
paved: 
  7,459 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 13,538 km; unimproved earth 48,945 km 
Inland waterways: 
  8,600 km of navigable tributaries of Amazon system and 208 km Lago
  Titicaca
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 800 km; natural gas and natural gas liquids 64 km 
Ports: 
  Callao, Ilo, Iquitos, Matarani, Talara
Merchant marine: 
  17 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 142,425 GRT/229,746 DWT, bulk 3,
  cargo 10, oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1
note: 
  in addition, 6 naval tankers and 1 naval cargo are sometimes used
  commercially
Airports: 
total: 
  252 
usable: 
  222 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  37 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  24 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  54 
Telecommunications: 
  fairly adequate for most requirements; nationwide microwave system;
  544,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 273 AM, no FM, 140 TV, 144
  shortwave; satellite earth stations - 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 12
  domestic

@Peru, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (Ejercito Peruano), Navy (Marina de Guerra del Peru), Air Force
  (Fuerza Aerea del Peru), National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,199,785; fit for military service 4,188,706; reach
  military age (20) annually 246,427 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $500 million, about 2% of GDP (1991)


@Philippines, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, between Indonesia and China
Map references: 
  Asia, Oceania, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  300,000 sq km 
land area: 
  298,170 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Arizona
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  36,289 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
continental shelf: 
  to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  irregular polygon extending up to 100 nm from coastline as defined by
  1898 treaty; since late 1970s has also claimed polygonal-shaped area
  in South China Sea up to 285 nm in breadth
International disputes: 
  involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with China,
  Malaysia, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; claims Malaysian state
  of Sabah
Climate: 
  tropical marine; northeast monsoon (November to April); southwest
  monsoon (May to October)
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with narrow to extensive coastal lowlands
Natural resources: 
  timber, petroleum, nickel, cobalt, silver, gold, salt, copper 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  26% 
permanent crops: 
  11% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  40% 
other: 
  19% 
Irrigated land: 
  16,200 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution; air pollution in Manila
natural hazards: 
  astride typhoon belt, usually affected by 15 and struck by five to six
  cyclonic storms per year; subject to landslides, active volcanoes,
  destructive earthquakes, tsunamis
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of
  the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Climate Change, Tropical Timber

@Philippines, People

Population: 
  69,808,930 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.92% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  27.34 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.94 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.18 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  50.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.39 years 
male: 
  62.88 years 
female: 
  68.02 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.35 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Filipino(s) 
adjective: 
  Philippine 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Christian Malay 91.5%, Muslim Malay 4%, Chinese 1.5%, other 3% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 83%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 5%, Buddhist and other 3% 
Languages: 
  Pilipino (official; based on Tagalog), English (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  90% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  90% 
Labor force: 
  24.12 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 46%, industry and commerce 16%, services 18.5%, government
  10%, other 9.5% (1989)

@Philippines, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of the Philippines 
conventional short form: 
  Philippines 
local long form: 
  Republika ng Pilipinas 
local short form: 
  Pilipinas 
Digraph: 
  RP
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Manila 
Administrative divisions: 
  72 provinces and 61 chartered cities*; Abra, Agusan del Norte, Agusan
  del Sur, Aklan, Albay, Angeles*, Antique, Aurora, Bacolod*, Bago*,
  Baguio*, Bais*, Basilan, Basilan City*, Bataan, Batanes, Batangas,
  Batangas City*, Benguet, Bohol, Bukidnon, Bulacan, Butuan*,
  Cabanatuan*, Cadiz*, Cagayan, Cagayan de Oro*, Calbayog*, Caloocan*,
  Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur, Camiguin, Canlaon*, Capiz,
  Catanduanes, Cavite, Cavite City*, Cebu, Cebu City*, Cotabato*,
  Dagupan*, Danao*, Dapitan*, Davao City* Davao, Davao del Sur, Davao
  Oriental, Dipolog*, Dumaguete*, Eastern Samar, General Santos*,
  Gingoog*, Ifugao, Iligan*, Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, Iloilo, Iloilo
  City*, Iriga*, Isabela, Kalinga-Apayao, La Carlota*, Laguna, Lanao del
  Norte, Lanao del Sur, Laoag*, Lapu-Lapu*, La Union, Legaspi*, Leyte,
  Lipa*, Lucena*, Maguindanao, Mandaue*, Manila*, Marawi*, Marinduque,
  Masbate, Mindoro Occidental, Mindoro Oriental, Misamis Occidental,
  Misamis Oriental, Mountain, Naga*, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental,
  North Cotabato, Northern Samar, Nueva Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya, Olongapo*,
  Ormoc*, Oroquieta*, Ozamis*, Pagadian*, Palawan, Palayan*, Pampanga,
  Pangasinan, Pasay*, Puerto Princesa*, Quezon, Quezon City*, Quirino,
  Rizal, Romblon, Roxas*, Samar, San Carlos* (in Negros Occidental), San
  Carlos* (in Pangasinan), San Jose*, San Pablo*, Silay*, Siquijor,
  Sorsogon, South Cotabato, Southern Leyte, Sultan Kudarat, Sulu,
  Surigao*, Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Tacloban*, Tagaytay*,
  Tagbilaran*, Tangub*, Tarlac, Tawitawi, Toledo*, Trece Martires*,
  Zambales, Zamboanga*, Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur
Independence: 
  4 July 1946 (from US)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 12 June (1898) (from Spain)
Constitution: 
  2 February 1987, effective 11 February 1987
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish and Anglo-American law; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  15 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Fidel Valdes RAMOS (since 30 June 1992); Vice President
  Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA (since 30 June 1992); election last held 11
  May 1992 (next election to be held NA May 1998); results - Fidel
  Valdes RAMOS won 23.6% of votes, a narrow plurality
cabinet: 
  Executive Secretary; appointed by the president with the consent of
  the Commission of Appointments
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Congress (Kongreso)
Senate (Senado): 
  elections last held 11 May 1992 (next election to be held NA May
  1995); results - LDP 66%, NPC 20%, Lakas-NUCD 8%, Liberal 6%; seats -
  (24 total) LDP 15, NPC 5, Lakas-NUCD 2, Liberal 1, Independent 1
House of Representatives (Kapulungan Ng Mga Kinatawan): 
  elections last held 11 May 1992 (next election to be held NA May
  1995); results - LDP 43.5%; Lakas-NUCD 25%, NPC 23.5%, Liberal 5%, KBL
  3%; seats - (200 total) LDP 87, NPC 45, Lakas-NUCD 41, Liberal 15, NP
  6, KBL 3, Independent 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Filipino Struggle (Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipinas,
  Laban), Edgardo ESPIRITU; People Power-National Union of Christian
  Democrats (Lakas ng Edsa, NUCD and Partido Lakas Tao, Lakas/NUCD);
  Fidel V. RAMOS, President of the Republic, Raul MANGLAPUS, Jose de
  VENECIA, secretary general; Nationalist People's Coalition (NPC),
  Eduardo COJUANGCO; Liberal Party, Jovito SALONGA; People's Reform
  Party (PRP), Miriam DEFENSOR-SANTIAGO; New Society Movement (Kilusan
  Bagong Lipunan; KBL), Imelda MARCOS; Nacionalista Party (NP), Salvador
  H. LAUREL, president
Member of: 
  APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-24, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Raul Chaves RABE 
chancery: 
  1617 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-1414 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-7614 
consulate(s) general: 
  Agana (Guam), Chicago, Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, San
  Francisco, and Seattle 
consulate(s): 
  San Diego and San Jose (Saipan) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John D. NEGROPONTE 
embassy: 
  1201 Roxas Boulevard, Ermita Manila 1000 
mailing address: 
  APO AP 96440 
telephone: 
  [632] 521-7116 
FAX: 
  [632] 522-4361 
consulate(s) general: 
  Cebu 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with a white
  equilateral triangle based on the hoist side; in the center of the
  triangle is a yellow sun with eight primary rays (each containing
  three individual rays) and in each corner of the triangle is a small
  yellow five-pointed star

@Philippines, Economy

Overview: 
  Domestic output in this primarily agricultural economy failed to grow
  in 1992 and rose only slightly in 1993. Drought and power supply
  problems hampered production, while inadequate revenues prevented
  government pump priming. Worker remittances helped to supplement GDP.
  A marked increase in capital goods imports, particularly power
  generating equipment, telecommunications equipment, and electronic
  data processors, contributed to 20% import growth in both 1992 and
  1993.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $171 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7.6% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  9.2% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $11.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $13 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.7 billion (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $11.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  electronics, textiles, coconut products, cooper, fish
partners: 
  US 39%, Japan 18%, Germany 5%, UK 5%, Hong Kong 5% (1992)
Imports: 
  $17.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  raw materials 40%, capital goods 25%, petroleum products 10%
partners: 
  Japan 21%, US 18%, Taiwan 7%, Saudi Arabia 6%, Hong Kong 5%, South
  Korea 5% (1992)
External debt: 
  $34.1 billion (September 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1% (1992 est.); accounts for 34% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  7,850,000 kW
production: 
  28 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  420 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, wood products, food processing,
  electronics assembly, petroleum refining, fishing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 20% of GDP and about 45% of labor force; major
  crops - rice, coconuts, corn, sugarcane, bananas, pineapples, mangos;
  animal products - pork, eggs, beef; net exporter of farm products;
  fish catch of 2 million metric tons annually
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; growers
  are producing more and better quality cannabis despite government
  eradication efforts; transit point for Southwest Asian heroin bound
  for the US
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $3.6 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-88), $7.9
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $5 million; Communist countries
  (1975-89), $123 million 
Currency: 
  1 Philippine peso (P) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Philippine pesos (P) per US$1 - 27.725 (January 1994), 22.120 (1993),
  25.512 (1992), 27.479 (1991), 24.311 (1990), 21.737 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Philippines, Communications

Railroads: 
  378 km operable on Luzon, 34% government owned (1982)
Highways: 
total: 
  157,450 km 
paved: 
  22,400 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 85,050 km; unimproved earth
  50,000 km (1988)
Inland waterways: 
  3,219 km; limited to shallow-draft (less than 1.5 m) vessels
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 357 km 
Ports: 
  Cagayan de Oro, Cebu, Davao, Guimaras, Iloilo, Legaspi, Manila, Subic
  Bay
Merchant marine: 
  553 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 8,451,047 GRT/13,934,255 DWT,
  bulk 241, cargo 145, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk 10,
  combination ore/oil 1, container 8, liquefied gas 3, livestock carrier
  9, oil tanker 33, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 13, refrigerated cargo
  27, roll-on/roll-off cargo 14, short-sea passenger 12, vehicle carrier
  35 
note: 
  many Philippine flag ships are foreign owned and are on the register
  for the purpose of long-term bare-boat charter back to their original
  owners who are principally in Japan and Germany
Airports: 
total: 
  270 
usable: 
  238 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  74 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  9 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  57 
Telecommunications: 
  good international radio and submarine cable services; domestic and
  interisland service adequate; 872,900 telephones; broadcast stations -
  267 AM (including 6 US), 55 FM, 33 TV (including 4 US); submarine
  cables extended to Hong Kong, Guam, Singapore, Taiwan, and Japan;
  satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 2 Pacific Ocean
  INTELSAT, and 11 domestic

@Philippines, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Coast Guard and Marine Corps), Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 17,668,781; fit for military service 12,479,312; reach
  military age (20) annually 733,880 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $731 million, 1.4% of GNP (1992)


@Pitcairn Islands

Header
Affiliation: (dependent territory of the UK)
  
@Pitcairn Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia in the South Pacific Ocean, about halfway between
  Peru and New Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  47 sq km 
land area: 
  47 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  51 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, hot, humid, modified by southeast trade winds; rainy season
  (November to March)
Terrain: 
  rugged volcanic formation; rocky coastline with cliffs
Natural resources: 
  miro trees (used for handicrafts), fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA%
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons (especially November to March)
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Pitcairn Islands, People

Population: 
  71 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.93% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  NA
Death rate: 
  NA
Net migration rate: 
  NA
Infant mortality rate: 
  NA
Life expectancy at birth: 
  NA
Total fertility rate: 
  NA
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Pitcairn Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Pitcairn Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  descendants of the Bounty mutineers
Religions: 
  Seventh-Day Adventist 100% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Tahitian/English dialect 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA 
by occupation: 
  no business community in the usual sense; some public works;
  subsistence farming and fishing

@Pitcairn Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie, and Oeno Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Pitcairn Islands 
Digraph: 
  PC
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Adamstown 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen (second Saturday in June) 
Constitution: 
  Local Government Ordinance of 1964
Legal system: 
  local island by-laws
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal with three years residency
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by UK High
  Commissioner to New Zealand and Governor (non-resident) of the
  Pitcairn Islands David Joseph MOSS (since NA September 1990);
  Commissioner (non-resident) G.D. HARRAWAY (since NA; is the liason
  person between the governor and the Island Council)
head of government: 
  Island Magistrate and Chairman of the Island Council Jay WARREN (since
  NA) 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Island Council: 
  elections last held NA (next to be held NA); results - percent of vote
  by party NA; seats - (11 total, 5 elected) number of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Island Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  SPC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Pitcairn Islander coat of arms centered on the outer half of the flag;
  the coat of arms is yellow, green, and light blue with a shield
  featuring a yellow anchor

@Pitcairn Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The inhabitants exist on fishing and subsistence farming. The fertile
  soil of the valleys produces a wide variety of fruits and vegetables,
  including citrus, sugar cane, watermelons, bananas, yams, and beans.
  Bartering is an important part of the economy. The major sources of
  revenue are the sale of postage stamps to collectors and the sale of
  handicrafts to passing ships.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $430,000 
expenditures: 
  $429,000, including capital expenditures of $NA (1987 est.)
Exports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  fruits, vegetables, curios
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $NA
commodities: 
  fuel oil, machinery, building materials, flour, sugar, other
  foodstuffs
partners: 
  NA
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  110 kW
production: 
  300,000 kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,360 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  postage stamp sales, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  based on subsistence fishing and farming; wide variety of fruits and
  vegetables grown; must import grain products
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  ODA bilateral commitments (1992-93), $84,000 
Currency: 
  1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.7771 (January 1994), 1.8495
  (1993), 1.8584 (1992), 1.7265 (1991), 1.6750 (1990), 1.6711 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Pitcairn Islands, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  6.4 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 6.4 km 
Ports: 
  Bounty Bay
Airports: 
  none
Telecommunications: 
  24 telephones; party line telephone service on the island; broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV; diesel generator provides electricity

@Pitcairn Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Poland, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between Germany and Belarus
Map references: 
  Asia, Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of
  the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  312,680 sq km 
land area: 
  304,510 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,114 km, Belarus 605 km, Czech Republic 658 km, Germany 456 km,
  Lithuania 91 km, Russia (Kaliningrad Oblast) 432 km, Slovakia 444 km,
  Ukraine 428 km 
Coastline: 
  491 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate with cold, cloudy, moderately severe winters with frequent
  precipitation; mild summers with frequent showers and thundershowers
Terrain: 
  mostly flat plain; mountains along southern border
Natural resources: 
  coal, sulfur, copper, natural gas, silver, lead, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  46% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  13% 
forest and woodland: 
  28% 
other: 
  12% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,000 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  forest damage due to air pollution; improper means for disposal of
  large amounts of hazardous and industrial waste; severe water
  pollution from industrial and municipal sources; severe air pollution
  results from emissions of sulfur dioxide from coal-fired power plants
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands; signed,
  but not ratified - Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of
  the Sea
Note: 
  historically, an area of conflict because of flat terrain and the lack
  of natural barriers on the North European Plain

@Poland, People

Population: 
  38,654,561 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.35% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.44 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.4 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  13.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.66 years 
male: 
  68.64 years 
female: 
  76.91 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.94 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Pole(s) 
adjective: 
  Polish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polish 97.6%, German 1.3%, Ukrainian 0.6%, Byelorussian 0.5% (1990
  est.)
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 95% (about 75% practicing), Eastern Orthodox,
  Protestant, and other 5% 
Languages: 
  Polish 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1978)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  17.329 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 32.0%, agriculture 27.6%, trade, transport,
  and communications 14.7%, government and other 24.6% (1992)

@Poland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Poland 
conventional short form: 
  Poland 
local long form: 
  Rzeczpospolita Polska 
local short form: 
  Polska 
Digraph: 
  PL
Type: 
  democratic state 
Capital: 
  Warsaw 
Administrative divisions: 
  49 provinces (wojewodztwa, singular - wojewodztwo); Biala Podlaska,
  Bialystok, Bielsko Biala, Bydgoszcz, Chelm, Ciechanow, Czestochowa,
  Elblag, Gdansk, Gorzow, Jelenia Gora, Kalisz, Katowice, Kielce, Konin,
  Koszalin, Krakow, Krosno, Legnica, Leszno, Lodz, Lomza, Lublin, Nowy
  Sacz, Olsztyn, Opole, Ostroleka, Pila, Piotrkow, Plock, Poznan,
  Przemysl, Radom, Rzeszow, Siedlce, Sieradz, Skierniewice, Slupsk,
  Suwalki, Szczecin, Tarnobrzeg, Tarnow, Torun, Walbrzych, Warszawa,
  Wloclawek, Wroclaw, Zamosc, Zielona Gora
Independence: 
  11 November 1918 (independent republic proclaimed)
National holiday: 
  Constitution Day, 3 May (1791) 
Constitution: 
  interim "small constitution" came into effect in December 1992
  replacing the Communist-imposed Constitution of 22 July 1952; new
  democratic Constitution being drafted
Legal system: 
  mixture of Continental (Napoleonic) civil law and holdover Communist
  legal theory; changes being gradually introduced as part of broader
  democratization process; limited judicial review of legislative acts;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Lech WALESA (since 22 December 1990); election first round
  held 25 November 1990, second round held 9 December 1990 (next to be
  held NA November 1995); results - second round Lech WALESA 74.7%,
  Stanislaw TYMINSKI 25.3%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Waldemar PAWLAK (since 26 October 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; responsible to the president and the Sejm
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly (Zgromadzenie Narodowe)
Senate (Senat): 
  elections last held 19 September 1993 (next to be held no later than
  NA October 1997); seats - (100 total)
post-Solidarity bloc: 
  UW 6, NSZZ 12, BBWR 2
non-Communist, non-Solidarity: 
  independents 7, unaffiliated 1, vacant 1 (to be filled in a 19 June
  election)
Communist origin or linked: 
  PSL 34, SLD 37
Diet (Sejm): 
  elections last held 19 September 1993 (next to be held no later than
  NA October 1997); seats - (460 total)
post-Solidarity bloc: 
  UW 74, UP 41, BBWR 16
non-Communist, non-Solidarity: 
  KPN 22
Communist origin or linked: 
  SLD 171, PSL 132
note: 
  4 seats were won by ethnic Germans
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
post-Solidarity parties: 
  Freedom Union (WD; UD and Liberal Democratic Congress merged to form
  Freedom Union), Tadeusz MAZOWIECKI; Christian-National Union (ZCHN),
  Wieslaw CHRZANOWSKI; Centrum (PC), Jaroslaw KACZYNSKI; Peasant
  Alliance (PL), Gabriel JANOWSKI; Solidarity Trade Union (NSZZ), Marian
  KRZAKLEWSKI; Union of Labor (UP), Ryszard BUGAJ; Christian-Democratic
  Party (PCHD), Pawel LACZKOWSKI; Conservative Party, Alexander HALL;
  Nonparty Bloc for the Support of the Reforms (BBWR)
non-Communist, non-Solidarity: 
  Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN), Leszek MOCZULSKI;
  Polish Economic Program (PPG), Janusz REWINSKI; Christian Democrats
  (CHD), Andrzej OWSINSKI; German Minority (MN), Henryk KROL; Union of
  Real Politics (UPR), Janusz KORWIN-MIKKE; Democratic Party (SD),
  Antoni MACKIEWICZ; Party X, Stanislaw Tyminski
Communist origin or linked: 
  Social Democracy (SDRP, party of Poland), Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI;
  Polish Peasants' Party (PSL), Waldemar PAWLAK; Democratic Left
  Alliance, Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI
Other political or pressure groups: 
  powerful Roman Catholic Church; Solidarity (trade union); All Poland
  Trade Union Alliance (OPZZ), populist program
Member of: 
  BIS, BSEC (observer), CBSS, CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, COCOM (cooperating),
  CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NACC, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS (observer), PCA,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNDOF, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNOMIG, UNPROFOR,
  UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jerzy KOZMINSKI 
chancery: 
  2640 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-3800 through 3802 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-6271 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Nicholas A. REY 
embassy: 
  Aleje Ujazdowskie 29/31, Warsaw 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy Warsaw, Unit 1340, or APO AE 09213-1340 
telephone: 
  [48] (2) 628-3041 
FAX: 
  [48] (2) 628-8298 
consulate(s) general: 
  Krakow, Poznan 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red; similar to the
  flags of Indonesia and Monaco which are red (top) and white

@Poland, Economy

Overview: 
  Poland is continuing the difficult transition to a market economy that
  began on 1 January 1990, when the new democratic government instituted
  "shock therapy" by decontrolling prices, slashing subsidies, and
  drastically reducing import barriers. The economy contracted sharply
  in 1990 and 1991, but in 1992 real GDP grew 1% despite a severe
  drought. Real GDP expanded about 4% in 1993, the highest rate in
  Europe except for Albania. About half of GDP now comes from the
  private sector even though privatization of the large state-owned
  enterprises is proceeding slowly and most industry remains in state
  hands. The pattern of industrial production is changing rapidly;
  output of textiles and construction materials is well above 1990
  levels, while output of basic metals remains depressed. Inflation,
  which had exceeded 50% monthly in late 1989, was down to about 37% for
  all of 1993, as the government held the budget deficit below 3% of
  GDP. Unemployment has risen steadily, however, to about 16%. The trade
  deficit is also a problem, in part due to recession in Western Europe,
  Poland's main customer. The new government elected in September 1993
  is politically to the left of its predecessor but is continuing the
  reform process.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $180.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,680 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  37% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  15.7% (December 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $24.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $27.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.5 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $13.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery 24%, metals 17%, chemicals 12%, fuels and power 11%, food
  10% (1992)
partners: 
  Germany 31.4%, Netherlands 6.0%, Italy 5.6%, Russia 5.5% (1992)
Imports: 
  $15.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  fuels and power 17%, machinery 36%, chemicals 17%, food 8% (1992)
partners: 
  Germany 23.9%, Russia 8.5%, Italy 6.9%, UK 6.7% (1992)
External debt: 
  $47 billion (1993); note - Poland's Western government creditors
  promised in 1991 to forgive 30% of Warsaw's $35 billion official debt
  immediately and to forgive another 20% in 1994; foreign banks agreed
  in early 1994 to forgive 45% of their $12 billion debt claim
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  31,530,000 kW
production: 
  137 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,570 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  machine building, iron and steel, extractive industries, chemicals,
  shipbuilding, food processing, glass, beverages, textiles
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 7% of GDP and a much larger share of labor force; 75% of
  output from private farms, 25% from state farms; productivity remains
  low by European standards; leading European producer of rye, rapeseed,
  and potatoes; wide variety of other crops and livestock; major
  exporter of pork products; normally self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producers of opium for domestic consumption and amphetamines
  for the international market; transshipment point for Asian and Latin
  American illicit drugs to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  bilateral aid to non-Communist less developed countries (1954-89),
  $2.2 billion 
recipient: 
  Western governments and institutions have pledged $8 billion in grants
  and loans since 1989, but most of the money has not been disbursed
Currency: 
  1 zloty (Zl) = 100 groszy
Exchange rates: 
  zlotych (Zl) per US$1 - 21,080 (January 1994), 18,115 (1993), 13,626
  (1992), 10,576 (1991), 9,500 (1990), 1,439.18 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Poland, Communications

Railroads: 
  26,250 km total; 23,857 km 1.435-meter gauge, 397 km 1.520-meter
  gauge, 1,996 km narrow gauge; 8,987 km double track; 11,510 km
  electrified; government owned (1991)
Highways: 
total: 
  360,629 km (excluding farm, factory and forest roads)
paved: 
  220,000 km (220 km of which are limited access expressways)
unpaved: 
  140,629 km (1988)
Inland waterways: 
  3,997 km navigable rivers and canals (1991)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,986 km; petroleum products 360 km; natural gas 4,600 km
  (1992)
Ports: 
  Gdansk, Gdynia, Szczecin, Swinoujscie; principal inland ports are
  Gliwice on Kanal Gliwicki, Wrocaw on the Oder, and Warsaw on the
  Vistula
Merchant marine: 
  173 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,327,855 GRT/3,458,445 DWT,
  bulk 89, cargo 57, chemical tanker 4, container 8, oil tanker 1,
  passenger 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8, short-sea passenger 5 
note: 
  Poland owns 3 ships operating under Liberian registry
Airports: 
total: 
  209 
usable: 
  167 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  70 
with runway over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  47 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  78 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  severely underdeveloped and outmoded system; cable, open wire and
  microwave; phone density is 10.5 phones per 100 residents (October
  1990); 3.6 million telephone subscribers; exchanges are 86% automatic
  (1991); broadcast stations - 27 AM, 27 FM, 40 (5 Soviet repeaters) TV;
  9.6 million TVs; 1 satellite earth station using INTELSAT, EUTELSAT,
  INMARSAT and Intersputnik

@Poland, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 10,046,993; fit for military service 7,856,680; reach
  military age (19) annually 316,339 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  30.8 trillion zlotych, 1.8% of GNP (1993 est.); note - conversion of
  defense expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate
  could produce misleading results


@Portugal, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Europe, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean west of Spain
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  92,080 sq km 
land area: 
  91,640 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Indiana
note: 
  includes Azores and Madeira Islands
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,214 km, Spain 1,214 km 
Coastline: 
  1,793 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  sovereignty over Timor Timur (East Timor Province) disputed with
  Indonesia
Climate: 
  maritime temperate; cool and rainy in north, warmer and drier in south
Terrain: 
  mountainous north of the Tagus, rolling plains in south
Natural resources: 
  fish, forests (cork), tungsten, iron ore, uranium ore, marble 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  32% 
permanent crops: 
  6% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  40% 
other: 
  16% 
Irrigated land: 
  6,340 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion; air pollution caused by industrial and vehicle
  emissions; water pollution, especially in coastal areas
natural hazards: 
  Azores subject to severe earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands;
  signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  Azores and Madeira Islands occupy strategic locations along western
  sea approaches to Strait of Gibraltar

@Portugal, People

Population: 
  10,524,210 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.36% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.66 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.7 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  1.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  9.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.2 years 
male: 
  71.77 years 
female: 
  78.86 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.46 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Portuguese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Portuguese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  homogeneous Mediterranean stock in mainland, Azores, Madeira Islands;
  citizens of black African descent who immigrated to mainland during
  decolonization number less than 100,000
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant denominations 1%, other 2% 
Languages: 
  Portuguese 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  85% 
male: 
  89% 
female: 
  82% 
Labor force: 
  4,605,700 
by occupation: 
  services 45%, industry 35%, agriculture 20% (1988)

@Portugal, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Portuguese Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Portugal 
local long form: 
  Republica Portuguesa 
local short form: 
  Portugal 
Digraph: 
  PO
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Lisbon 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 districts (distritos, singular - distrito) and 2 autonomous
  regions* (regioes autonomas, singular - regiao autonoma); Aveiro,
  Acores (Azores)*, Beja, Braga, Braganca, Castelo Branco, Coimbra,
  Evora, Faro, Guarda, Leiria, Lisboa, Madeira*, Portalegre, Porto,
  Santarem, Setubal, Viana do Castelo, Vila Real, Viseu
Dependent areas: 
  Macau (scheduled to become a Special Administrative Region of China on
  20 December 1999)
Independence: 
  1140 (independent republic proclaimed 5 October 1910)
National holiday: 
  Day of Portugal, 10 June (1580) 
Constitution: 
  25 April 1976, revised 30 October 1982 and 1 June 1989
Legal system: 
  civil law system; the Constitutional Tribunal reviews the
  constitutionality of legislation; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
  with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Dr. Mario Alberto Nobre Lopes SOARES (since 9 March 1986);
  election last held 13 February 1991 (next to be held NA February
  1996); results - Dr. Mario Lopes SOARES 70%, Basilio HORTA 14%, Carlos
  CARVALHAS 13%, Carlos MARQUES 3%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Anibal CAVACO SILVA (since 6 November 1985) 
Council of State: 
  acts as a consultative body to the president
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on recommendation of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Assembly of the Republic (Assembleia da Republica): 
  elections last held 6 October 1991 (next to be held NA October 1995);
  results - PSD 50.4%, PS 29.3%, CDU 8.8%, Center Democrats 4.4%,
  National Solidarity Party 1.7%, PRD 0.6%, other 4.8%; seats - (230
  total) PSD 136, PS 71, CDU 17, Center Democrats 5, National Solidarity
  Party 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Tribunal of Justice (Supremo Tribunal de Justica) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Social Democratic Party (PSD), Anibal CAVACO Silva; Portuguese
  Socialist Party (PS), Antonio GUTERRES; Party of Democratic Renewal
  (PRD), Pedro CANAVARRO; Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), Carlos
  CARVALHAS; Social Democratic Center (CDS), Manuel MONTEIRO; National
  Solidarity Party (PSN), Manuel SERGIO; Center Democratic Party (CDS);
  United Democratic Coalition (CDU; Communists)
Member of: 
  AfDB, Australian Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC,
  ECE, ECLAC, EIB, FAO, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA,
  IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), LORCS, MTCR, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA,
  NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMOZ,
  UNPROFOR, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Francisco Jose Laco Treichler KNOPFLI 
chancery: 
  2125 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 328-8610 
FAX: 
  (202) 462-3726 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, New York, Newark (New Jersey), and San Francisco 
consulate(s): 
  Los Angeles, New Bedford (Massachusetts), and Providence (Rhode
  Island) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Sharon P. WILKINSON 
embassy: 
  Avenida das Forcas Armadas, 1600 Lisbon 
mailing address: 
  PSC 83, Lisbon; APO AE 09726 
telephone: 
  [351] (1) 726-6600 or 6659, 8670, 8880 
FAX: 
  [351] (1) 726-9109 
consulate(s): 
  Ponta Delgada (Azores) 
Flag: 
  two vertical bands of green (hoist side, two-fifths) and red
  (three-fifths) with the Portuguese coat of arms centered on the
  dividing line

@Portugal, Economy

Overview: 
  Portugal's economy registered only 1.1% growth in 1992 and contracted
  by 0.4% in 1993, in contrast to the 4.5% average of the fast-paced
  1986-90 period. Recession in the European Union, which accounts for
  75% of Portugal's international trade, is the key factor in the
  downturn. The government's long-run economic goal is the modernization
  of Portuguese markets, industry, infrastructure, and workforce in
  order to catch up with productivity and income levels of the more
  advanced EU countries. Per capita income now equals only 55% of the EU
  average. The government's medium-term economic objective is to be in
  the first tier of EU countries eligible to join the economic and
  monetary union (EMU) as early as 1997. Economic policy in 1993 focused
  on reducing inflationary pressures by lowering the fiscal deficit,
  maintaining a stable escudo, moderating wage increases, and
  encouraging increased competition. Resumption of growth in the short
  run depends on the revival of growth in Europe as a whole, not a
  likely prospect in the immediate future.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $91.5 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.4% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $8,700 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  7% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $27.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $33.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $4.5 billion (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $17.5 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  cotton textiles, cork and paper products, canned fish, wine, timber
  and timber products, resin, machinery, appliances
partners: 
  EC 75.4%, other developed countries 12.4%, US 3.8% (1992)
Imports: 
  $28 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment, agricultural products, chemicals,
  petroleum, textiles
partners: 
  EC 72%, other developed countries 10.9% less developed countries
  12.9%, US 3.4%
External debt: 
  $20 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 9.1% (1990); accounts for 40% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,624,000 kW
production: 
  26.4 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,520 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles and footwear; wood pulp, paper, and cork; metalworking; oil
  refining; chemicals; fish canning; wine; tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 6.1% of GDP and 20% of labor force; small, inefficient
  farms; imports more than half of food needs; major crops - grain,
  potatoes, olives, grapes; livestock sector - sheep, cattle, goats,
  poultry, meat, dairy products
Illicit drugs: 
  increasingly important gateway country for Latin American cocaine
  entering the European market; transshipment point for hashish from
  North Africa to Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.8 billion 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $1.2 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Portuguese escudo (Esc) = 100 centavos
Exchange rates: 
  Portuguese escudos (Esc) per US$1 - 176.16 (January 1994), 160.80
  (1993), 135.00 (1992), 144.48 (1991), 142.55 (1990), 157.46 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Portugal, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,625 km total; state-owned Portuguese Railroad Co. (CP) operates
  2,858 km 1.665-meter gauge (434 km electrified and 426 km double
  track), 755 km 1.000-meter gauge; 12 km (1.435-meter gauge)
  electrified, double track, privately owned
Highways: 
total: 
  73,661 km 
paved and gravel: 
  61,599 km (including 453 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  earth 12,062 km 
Inland waterways: 
  820 km navigable; relatively unimportant to national economy, used by
  shallow-draft craft limited to 300-metric-ton cargo capacity
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 22 km; petroleum products 58 km 
Ports: 
  Leixoes, Lisbon, Porto, Ponta Delgada (Azores), Velas (Azores),
  Setubal, Sines
Merchant marine: 
  61 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 962,293 GRT/1,779,855 DWT, bulk
  3, cargo 25, chemical tanker 4, container 3, liquified gas 2, oil
  tanker 18, refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea
  passenger 2 
note: 
  Portugal has created a captive register on Madeira (MAR) for
  Portuguese-owned ships that will have the taxation and crewing
  benefits of a flag of convenience; although only one ship currently is
  known to fly the Portuguese flag on the MAR register, it is likely
  that a majority of Portuguese flag ships will transfer to this
  subregister in a few years
Airports: 
total: 
  65 
usable: 
  63 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  37 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  11 
Telecommunications: 
  generally adequate integrated network of coaxial cables, open wire and
  microwave radio relay; 2,690,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 57
  AM, 66 (22 repeaters) FM, 66 (23 repeaters) TV; 6 submarine cables; 3
  INTELSAT earth stations (2 Atlantic Ocean, 1 Indian Ocean), EUTELSAT,
  domestic satellite systems (mainland and Azores); tropospheric link to
  Azores

@Portugal, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Marines), Air Force, National Republican Guard,
  Fiscal Guard, Public Security Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,723,987; fit for military service 2,207,637; reach
  military age (20) annually 89,380 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.1 billion, 2.9% of GDP (1993)


@Puerto Rico

Header
Affiliation: 
  (commonwealth associated with the US) 

@Puerto Rico, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the North Caribbean Sea, between the Dominican Republic
  and the Virgin Islands group
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  9,104 sq km 
land area: 
  8,959 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than three times the size of Rhode Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  501 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine, mild, little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains with coastal plain belt in north; mountains
  precipitous to sea on west coast; sandy beaches along most coastal
  areas
Natural resources: 
  some copper and nickel, potential for onshore and offshore crude oil 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  9% 
meadows and pastures: 
  41% 
forest and woodland: 
  20% 
other: 
  22% 
Irrigated land: 
  390 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  important location along the Mona Passage - a key shipping lane to the
  Panama Canal; San Juan is one of the biggest and best natural harbors
  in the Caribbean; many small rivers and high central mountains ensure
  land is well watered; south coast relatively dry; fertile coastal
  plain belt in north

@Puerto Rico, People

Population: 
  3,801,977 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.13% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.5 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.93 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -7.29 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  13.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.95 years 
male: 
  70.42 years 
female: 
  77.65 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.04 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Puerto Rican(s) 
adjective: 
  Puerto Rican 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Hispanic 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant denominations and other 15% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), English widely understood
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  89% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  88% 
Labor force: 
  1.17 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  government 20%, manufacturing 14%, trade 17%, construction 5%,
  communications and transportation 5%, other 39% (1992)

@Puerto Rico, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
conventional short form: 
  Puerto Rico 
Digraph: 
  RQ
Type: 
  commonwealth associated with the US
Capital: 
  San Juan 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (commonwealth associated with the US), note: there are 78
  municipalities
Independence: 
  none (commonwealth associated with the US)
National holiday: 
  US Independence Day, 4 July (1776) 
Constitution: 
  ratified 3 March 1952; approved by US Congress 3 July 1952; effective
  25 July 1952
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish civil code
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal; indigenous inhabitants are US citizens but
  do not vote in US presidential elections
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January 1993); Vice
  President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993) 
head of government: 
  Governor Pedro ROSSELLO (since NA January 1993); election last held 3
  November 1992 (next to be held NA November 1996); results - Pedro
  ROSSELLO (PND) 50%, Victoria MUNOZ (PPD) 46%, Fernando MARTIN (PIP) 4%
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Legislative Assembly
Senate: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (27 total) seats
  by party NA
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (53 total) seats
  by party NA
US House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held NA November
  1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) seats
  by party NA; note - Puerto Rico elects one representative to the US
  House of Representatives, Carlos Romero BARCELO
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Republican Party of Puerto Rico, Freddy VALENTIN; Popular
  Democratic Party (PPD), Rafael HERNANDEZ Colon; New Progressive Party
  (PNP), Carlos ROMERO Barcelo; Puerto Rican Socialist Party (PSP), Juan
  MARI Bras and Carlos GALLISA; Puerto Rican Independence Party (PIP),
  Ruben BERRIOS Martinez; Puerto Rican Communist Party (PCP), leader(s)
  unknown
Other political or pressure groups: 
  all have engaged in terrorist activities - Armed Forces for National
  Liberation (FALN); Volunteers of the Puerto Rican Revolution; Boricua
  Popular Army (also known as the Macheteros); Armed Forces of Popular
  Resistance
Member of: 
  CARICOM (observer), ECLAC (associate), FAO (associate), ICFTU,
  INTERPOL (subbureau), IOC, WCL, WFTU, WHO (associate), WTO (associate)
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (commonwealth associated with the US)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (commonwealth associated with the US)
Flag: 
  five equal horizontal bands of red (top and bottom) alternating with
  white; a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side bears a large
  white five-pointed star in the center; design based on the US flag

@Puerto Rico, Economy

Overview: 
  Puerto Rico has one of the most dynamic economies in the Caribbean
  region. Industry has surpassed agriculture as the primary sector of
  economic activity and income. Encouraged by duty free access to the US
  and by tax incentives, US firms have invested heavily in Puerto Rico
  since the 1950s. US minimum wage laws apply. Important industries
  include pharmaceuticals, electronics, textiles, petrochemicals, and
  processed foods. Sugar production has lost out to dairy production and
  other livestock products as the main source of income in the
  agricultural sector. Tourism has traditionally been an important
  source of income for the island, with estimated arrivals of nearly 3
  million tourists in 1989. Unemployment remains a severe problem at
  18%.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $26.8 billion (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $7,100 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.1% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  18% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $5.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $5.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $258 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $21.8 billion (1992)
commodities: 
  pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel, canned tuna, rum, beverage
  concentrates, medical equipment, instruments
partners: 
  US 88.3% (1990)
Imports: 
  $14.8 billion (1992)
commodities: 
  chemicals, clothing, food, fish, petroleum products
partners: 
  US 68.8% (1990)
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.2% (FY92)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,040,000 kW
production: 
  16.1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,260 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  manufacturing accounts for 55.5% of GDP: manufacturing of
  pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel, food products, instruments;
  tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for only 3% of labor force and less than 2% of GDP: crops -
  sugarcane, coffee, pineapples, plantains, bananas; livestock - cattle,
  chickens; imports a large share of food needs (1992)
Economic aid: 
  none
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Puerto Rico, Communications

Railroads: 
  96 km rural narrow-gauge system for hauling sugarcane; no passenger
  railroads
Highways: 
total: 
  13,762 km 
paved: 
  13,762 km (1982)
Ports: 
  San Juan, Ponce, Mayaguez, Arecibo
Airports: 
total: 
  30 
usable: 
  23 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  19 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system, integrated with that of the US by high capacity
  submarine cable and INTELSAT with high-speed data capability; digital
  telephone system with about 1 million lines; cellular telephone
  service; broadcast stations - 50 AM, 63 FM, 9 TV; cable television
  available with US programs (1990)

@Puerto Rico, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  paramilitary National Guard, Police Force 
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Qatar, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, peninsula jutting into the central Persian Gulf, between
  Iran and Saudi Arabia
Map references: 
  Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  11,000 sq km 
land area: 
  11,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  total 60 km, Saudi Arabia 60 km 
Coastline: 
  563 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  territorial dispute with Bahrain over the Hawar Islands; maritime
  boundary with Bahrain
Climate: 
  desert; hot, dry; humid and sultry in summer
Terrain: 
  mostly flat and barren desert covered with loose sand and gravel
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  95% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  limited freshwater resources are increasing dependence on large-scale
  desalination facilities
natural hazards: 
  haze, dust storms, sandstorms common
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location in central Persian Gulf near major petroleum
  deposits

@Qatar, People

Population: 
  512,779 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.56% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  18.83 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  3.53 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  10.31 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  21.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.64 years 
male: 
  70.08 years 
female: 
  75.09 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.74 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Qatari(s) 
adjective: 
  Qatari 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab 40%, Pakistani 18%, Indian 18%, Iranian 10%, other 14% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 95% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), English commonly used as a second language
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1986)
total population: 
  76% 
male: 
  77% 
female: 
  72% 
Labor force: 
  104,000 (85% non-Qatari in private sector) (1983)

@Qatar, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  State of Qatar 
conventional short form: 
  Qatar 
local long form: 
  Dawlat Qatar 
local short form: 
  Qatar 
Digraph: 
  QA
Type: 
  traditional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Doha 
Administrative divisions: 
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 9 municipalities (baladiyat, singular -
  baladiyah); Ad Dawhah, Al Ghuwayriyah, Al Jumayliyah, Al Khawr, Al
  Rayyan, Al Wakrah, Ash Shamal, Jarayan al Batnah, Umm Salal
Independence: 
  3 September 1971 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 3 September (1971) 
Constitution: 
  provisional constitution enacted 2 April 1970
Legal system: 
  discretionary system of law controlled by the amir, although civil
  codes are being implemented; Islamic law is significant in personal
  matters
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Amir and Prime Minister KHALIFA bin Hamad Al Thani (since 22 February
  1972); Crown Prince HAMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani (appointed 31 May 1977;
  son of Amir and Minister of Defense) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the amir
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Advisory Council (Majlis al-Shura): 
  constitution calls for elections for part of this consultative body,
  but no elections have been held; seats - (30 total)
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  IDB, IFAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador ABD AL-RAHMAN bin Saud bin Faud Al Thani 
chancery: 
  Suite 1180, 600 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037 
telephone: 
  (202) 338-0111 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Kenton W. KEITH 
embassy: 
  149 Ali Bin Ahmed St., Farig Bin Omran (opposite the television
  station), Doha 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 2399, Doha 
telephone: 
  (0974) 864701 through 864703 
FAX: 
  (0974) 861669 
Flag: 
  maroon with a broad white serrated band (nine white points) on the
  hoist side

@Qatar, Economy

Overview: 
  Oil is the backbone of the economy and accounts for roughly 85% of
  export earnings and 75% of government revenues. Proved oil reserves of
  3.3 billion barrels should ensure continued output at current levels
  for about 25 years. Oil has given Qatar a per capita GDP comparable to
  the leading industrial countries. Production and export of natural gas
  are becoming increasingly important.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $8.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $17,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3 billion, including capital expenditures of $440 million (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum products 85%, steel, fertilizers
partners: 
  Japan 61%, Brazil 6%, South Korea 5%, UAE 4%, Singapore 3% (1991)
Imports: 
  $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, consumer goods, food, chemicals
partners: 
  Japan 14%, UK 12%, US 12%, Germany 9%, France 5% (1991)
External debt: 
  $1.5 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for 64% of GDP, including oil
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,596,000 kW
production: 
  4.818 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  9,655 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  crude oil production and refining, fertilizers, petrochemicals, steel
  (rolls reinforcing bars for concrete construction), cement
Agriculture: 
  farming and grazing on small scale, less than 2% of GDP; agricultural
  area is small and government-owned; commercial fishing increasing in
  importance; most food imported
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  pledged in ODA to less developed countries (1979-88), $2.7 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Qatari riyal (QR) = 100 dirhams
Exchange rates: 
  Qatari riyals (QR) per US$1 - 3.6400 riyals (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Qatar, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,500 km 
paved: 
  1,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, natural surface 500 km (est.)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 235 km; natural gas 400 km 
Ports: 
  Doha, Umm Sa'id, Halul Island
Merchant marine: 
  18 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 373,491 GRT/567,294 DWT,
  container 4, cargo 11, oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system centered in Doha; 110,000 telephones; tropospheric
  scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and UAE;
  submarine cable to Bahrain and UAE; satellite earth stations - 1
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 ARABSAT; broadcast
  stations - 2 AM, 3 FM, 3 TV

@Qatar, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Public Security 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 217,538; fit for military service 114,468; reach
  military age (18) annually 3,737 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA%, of GDP


@Reunion

Header

Affiliation: 
  (overseas department of France) 

@Reunion, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the western Indian Ocean, 750 km east of
  Madagascar
Map references: 
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,510 sq km 
land area: 
  2,500 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Rhode Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  201 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, but moderates with elevation; cool and dry from May to
  November, hot and rainy from November to April
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged and mountainous; fertile lowlands along coast
Natural resources: 
  fish, arable land 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  35% 
other: 
  39% 
Irrigated land: 
  60 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  periodic, devastating cyclones
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Reunion, People

Population: 
  652,857 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.03% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.14 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.87 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.07 years 
male: 
  71 years 
female: 
  77.29 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.78 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Reunionese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Reunionese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  French, African, Malagasy, Chinese, Pakistani, Indian 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 94% 
Languages: 
  French (official), Creole widely used
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1982)
total population: 
  69% 
male: 
  67% 
female: 
  74% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  agriculture 30%, industry 21%, services 49% (1981)
note: 
  63% of population of working age (1983)

@Reunion, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Department of Reunion 
conventional short form: 
  Reunion 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ile de la Reunion 
Digraph: 
  RE
Type: 
  overseas department of France 
Capital: 
  Saint-Denis 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Independence: 
  none (overseas department of France)
National holiday: 
  Taking of the Bastille, 14 July (1789) 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  Prefect of Reunion Island Hubert FOURNIER (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral General Council and unicameral Regional Council
General Council: 
  elections last held 22 March 1991 (next to be held March 1997);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (44 total) seats by
  party NA
Regional Council: 
  elections last held 22 March 1992 (next to be held by NA March 1998);
  results - UPF 25.6%, PCR 17.9%, PS 10.5%, Independent 33.4%, other
  12.6%; seats - (45 total) Sudre 17, UPF 14, PCR 9, PS 5
French Senate: 
  elections last held 24 September 1992 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (3 total) RPR 1, FRA 1,
  independent 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held NA 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (5 total) PS 1, PCR 1,
  UPF 1, RPR 1, UDF-CDS 1; note - 5 members to the French National
  Assembly who are voting members
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeals (Cour d'Appel) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Rally for the Republic (RPR), Francois MAS; Union for French Democracy
  (UDF), Gilbert GERARD; Communist Party of Reunion (PCR), Elie HOARAU;;
  France-Reunion Future (FRA), Andre THIEN AH KOON; Reunion Communist
  Party (PCR); Socialist Party (PS), Jean-Claude FRUTEAU; Social
  Democrats (CDS); other small parties
Member of: 
  FZ, WFTU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas department of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (overseas department of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@Reunion, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy has traditionally been based on agriculture. Sugarcane has
  been the primary crop for more than a century, and in some years it
  accounts for 85% of exports. The government has been pushing the
  development of a tourist industry to relieve high unemployment, which
  recently amounted to one-third of the labor force. The gap in Reunion
  between the well-off and the poor is extraordinary and accounts for
  the persistent social tensions. The white and Indian communities are
  substantially better off than other segments of the population, often
  approaching European standards, whereas indigenous groups suffer the
  poverty and unemployment typical of the poorer nations of the African
  continent. The outbreak of severe rioting in February 1991 illustrates
  the seriousness of socioeconomic tensions. The economic well-being of
  Reunion depends heavily on continued financial assistance from France.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $3,900 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1.3% (1988)
Unemployment rate: 
  35% (February 1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $358 million 
expenditures: 
  $914 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1986 est.)
Exports: 
  $166 million (f.o.b., 1988)
commodities: 
  sugar 75%, rum and molasses 4%, perfume essences 4%, lobster 3%,
  vanilla and tea 1%
partners: 
  France, Mauritius, Bahrain, South Africa, Italy
Imports: 
  $1.7 billion (c.i.f., 1988)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, food, beverages, tobacco, machinery and
  transportation equipment, raw materials, and petroleum products
partners: 
  France, Mauritius, Bahrain, South Africa, Italy
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; about 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  245,000 kW
production: 
  750 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,230 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  sugar, rum, cigarettes, several small shops producing handicraft items
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 30% of labor force; dominant sector of economy; cash
  crops - sugarcane, vanilla, tobacco; food crops - tropical fruits,
  vegetables, corn; imports large share of food needs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $14.8 billion 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Reunion, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,800 km 
paved: 
  2,200 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 600 km 
Ports: 
  Pointe des Galets
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  adequate system; modern open-wire and microwave network; principal
  center Saint-Denis; radiocommunication to Comoros, France, Madagascar;
  new microwave route to Mauritius; 85,900 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 3 AM, 13 FM, 1 (18 repeaters) TV; 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT
  earth station

@Reunion, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  French Forces (including Army, Navy, Air Force, Gendarmerie)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 170,810; fit for military service 88,108; reach
  military age (18) annually 5,867 (1994 est.)
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Romania, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea between
  Bulgaria and Ukraine
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  237,500 sq km 
land area: 
  230,340 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Oregon
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,508 km, Bulgaria 608 km, Hungary 443 km, Moldova 450 km,
  Serbia and Montenegro 476 km (all with Serbia), Ukraine (north) 362
  km, Ukraine (south) 169 km 
Coastline: 
  225 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  no official territorial claim by either Moldova or Romania, but
  nationalists in Romania seek the merger of Moldova with Romania;
  potential future dispute by Moldova and Romania against Ukraine over
  former southern and northern Bessarabian areas
Climate: 
  temperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and fog; sunny
  summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms
Terrain: 
  central Transylvanian Basin is separated from the Plain of Moldavia on
  the east by the Carpathian Mountains and separated from the Walachian
  Plain on the south by the Transylvanian Alps
Natural resources: 
  petroleum (reserves declining), timber, natural gas, coal, iron ore,
  salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  43% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  19% 
forest and woodland: 
  28% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  34,500 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion and degradation; water pollution; air pollution in south
  from industrial effluents; contamination of Danube delta wetlands
natural hazards: 
  earthquakes most severe in south and southwest; geologic structure and
  climate promote landslides
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of
  the Sea
Note: 
  controls most easily traversable land route between the Balkans,
  Moldova, and Ukraine

@Romania, People

Population: 
  23,181,415 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  the Romanian census of January 1992 gives the population for that date
  as 22.749 million; the government estimates that population declined
  in 1993 by 0.3%
Population growth rate: 
  0.06% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.66 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.02 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.07 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  19.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.74 years 
male: 
  68.81 years 
female: 
  74.84 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.82 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Romanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Romanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Romanian 89.1%, Hungarian 8.9%, German 0.4%, Ukrainian, Serb, Croat,
  Russian, Turk, and Gypsy 1.6% 
Religions: 
  Romanian Orthodox 70%, Roman Catholic 6% (of which 3% are Uniate),
  Protestant 6%, unaffiliated 18% 
Languages: 
  Romanian, Hungarian, German 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1978 est.)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  10,945,700 
by occupation: 
  industry 38%, agriculture 28%, other 34% (1989)

@Romania, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Romania 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Romania 
Digraph: 
  RO
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Bucharest 
Administrative divisions: 
  40 counties (judete, singular - judet) and 1 municipality*
  (municipiu); Alba, Arad, Arges, Bacau, Bihor, Bistrita-Nasaud,
  Botosani, Braila, Brasov, Bucuresti*, Buzau, Calarasi, Caras-Severin,
  Cluj, Constanta, Covasna, Dimbovita, Dolj, Galati, Gorj, Giurgiu,
  Harghita, Hunedoara, Ialomita, Iasi, Maramures, Mehedinti, Mures,
  Neamt, Olt, Prahova, Salaj, Satu Mare, Sibiu, Suceava, Teleorman,
  Timis, Tulcea, Vaslui, Vilcea, Vrancea
Independence: 
  1881 (from Turkey; republic proclaimed 30 December 1947)
National holiday: 
  National Day of Romania, 1 December (1990) 
Constitution: 
  8 December 1991
Legal system: 
  former mixture of civil law system and Communist legal theory is being
  revised to conform with European norms
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Ion ILIESCU (since 20 June 1990, previously President of
  Provisional Council of National Unity since 23 December 1989);
  election last held 27 September 1992 - with runoff between top two
  candidates on 11 October 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results - Ion
  ILIESCU 61.4%, Emil CONSTANTINESCU 38.6%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Nicolae VACAROIU (since November 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate (Senat): 
  elections last held 27 September 1992 (next to be held NA 1996);
  results - PDSR 27.5%, CDR 22.5%, PP-(FSN) 11%, others 39%; seats -
  (143 total) PDSR 49, CDR 34, PP-(FSN) 18, PUNR 14, UDMR 12, PRM 6,
  PDAR 5, PSM 5
House of Deputies (Adunarea Deputatilor): 
  elections last held 27 September 1992 (next to be held NA 1996);
  results - PDSR 27.5%, CDR 22.5%, PP-(FSN) 11%, others 39%; seats -
  (341 total) PDSR 117, CDR 82, PP-(FSN) 43, PUNR 30, UDMR 27, PRM 16,
  PSM 13, other 13
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice, Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Party (PD-(FSN)), Petre ROMAN; Party of Social Democracy in
  Romania (PDSR), Adrian NASTASE; Democratic Union of Hungarians in
  Romania (UDMR), Bela MARKO; National Liberal Party (PNL), Mircea
  IONESCU-QUINTUS; National Peasants' Christian and Democratic Party
  (PNTCD), Corneliu COPOSU; Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR),
  Gheorghe FUNAR; Socialist Labor Party (PSM), Ilie VERDET; Agrarian
  Democratic Party of Romania (PDAR), Victor SURDU; The Democratic
  Convention (CDR), Emil CONSTANTINESCU; Romania Mare Party (PRM),
  Corneliu Vadim TUDOR
note: 
  numerous other samll parties exist but almost all failed to gain
  representation in the most recent election
Other political or pressure groups: 
  various human rights and professional associations
Member of: 
  ACCT (observer), BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI (participating), CSCE, EBRD,
  ECE, FAO, G-9, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, NACC, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS (observer), PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOSOM, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
chancery: 
  1607 23rd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-4846, 4848, 4851 
FAX: 
  (202) 232-4748 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John R. DAVIS, Jr. 
embassy: 
  Strada Tudor Arghezi 7-9, Bucharest 
mailing address: 
  AmEmbassy (Buch), Unit 1315, Bucharest; APO AE 09213-1315 
telephone: 
  [40] (1) 210-4042 
FAX: 
  [40] (1) 210-0395 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red; the
  national coat of arms that used to be centered in the yellow band has
  been removed; now similar to the flags of Andorra and Chad

@Romania, Economy

Overview: 
  Despite the continuing difficulties in moving away from the former
  command system, the Romanian economy seems to have bottomed out in
  1993. Market oriented reforms have been introduced fitfully since the
  downfall of CEAUSESCU in December 1989, with the result a growing
  private sector, especially in services. The slow pace of structural
  reform, however, has exacerbated Romania's high inflation rate and
  eroded real wages. Agricultural production rebounded in 1993 from the
  previous year's drought-reduced harvest; food supplies are adequate,
  but expensive. Bucharest resisted pressure to devalue its currency
  despite a $638 million trade deficit in the first half of 1993 and the
  emergence of a black market for hard currency. Unable to support the
  currency, the national bank, nonetheless, was forced to depreciate the
  currency 65% over the course of the year. The return of winter
  revealed that much of Romania's infrastructure had deteriorated over
  the last four years due to reduced levels of public investment.
  Residents of the capital reported frequent disruptions of heating and
  water services.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $63.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $2,700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6% per month (March 1994)
Unemployment rate: 
  11% (March 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $19 billion 
expenditures: 
  $20 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.1 billion (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $4 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  metals and metal products 24%, mineral products 14%, textiles 10.7%,
  electric machines and equipment 9.3%, transport materials 9.2% (1993)
partners: 
  EC 36.1%, developing countries 27.4%, East and Central Europe 14.9%,
  EFTA 5.1%, Russia 5%, Japan 1.4%, US 1.3% (1993)
Imports: 
  $5.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  minerals 29%, machinery and equipment 17.2%, textiles 10%,
  agricultural goods 9% (1993)
partners: 
  EC 45.8%, East and Central Europe 8.6%, developing countries 22.6%,
  Russia 11%, EFTA 6.2%, US 5.0%, Japan 0.8% (1993)
External debt: 
  $4 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1% (1993 est.); accounts for 45% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  22,500,000 kW
production: 
  59 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,540 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  mining, timber, construction materials, metallurgy, chemicals, machine
  building, food processing, petroleum production and refining
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 18% of GDP and 28% of labor force; major wheat and corn
  producer; other products - sugar beets, sunflower seed, potatoes,
  milk, eggs, meat, grapes
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for southwest Asian heroin and Latin American
  cocaine transiting the Balkan route
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 leu (L) = 100 bani
Exchange rates: 
  lei (L) per US$1 - 1,387.16 (January 1994), 760.05 (1993), 307.95
  (1992), 76.39 (1991), 22.432 (1990), 14.922 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Romania, Communications

Railroads: 
  11,275 km total; 10,860 km 1.435-meter gauge, 370 km narrow gauge, 45
  km broad gauge; 3,411 km electrified, 3,060 km double track;
  government owned (1987)
Highways: 
total: 
  72,799 km 
paved: 
  35,970 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, stabilized earth 27,729 km; unsurfaced earth
  9,100 km (1985)
Inland waterways: 
  1,724 km (1984)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,800 km; petroleum products 1,429 km; natural gas 6,400 km
  (1992)
Ports: 
  Constanta, Galati, Braila, Mangalia; inland ports are Giurgiu,
  Drobeta-Turnu Severin, Orsova
Merchant marine: 
  241 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,626,421 GRT/4,017,380 DWT,
  bulk 49, cargo 167, container 2, oil tanker 14, passenger-cargo 1,
  rail-car carrier 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 7 
Airports: 
total: 
  234 
usable: 
  74 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  26 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  21 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  24 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  poor service; about 2.3 million telephone customers; 89% of phone
  network is automatic; cable and open wire; trunk network is microwave;
  present phone density is 9.85 per 100 residents; roughly 3,300
  villages with no service (February 1990); new digital international
  direct dial exchanges are in Bucharest (1993); broadcast stations - 12
  AM, 5 FM, 13 TV (1990); 1 satellite ground station using INTELSAT

@Romania, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Paramilitary Forces, Civil
  Defense 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 5,888,452; fit for military service 4,972,834; reach
  military age (20) annually 193,901 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  137 billion lei, 3% of GDP (1993); note - conversion of defense
  expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Russia, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Asia (that part west of the Urals is sometimes included with
  Europe), between Europe and the North Pacific Ocean
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian States,
  Commonwealth of Independent States - European States, Standard Time
  Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  17,075,200 sq km 
land area: 
  16,995,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 1.8 times the size of the US
Land boundaries: 
  total 20,139 km, Azerbaijan 284 km, Belarus 959 km, China (southeast)
  3,605 km, China (south) 40 km, Estonia 290 km, Finland 1,313 km,
  Georgia 723 km, Kazakhstan 6,846 km, North Korea 19 km, Latvia 217 km,
  Lithuania (Kaliningrad Oblast) 227 km, Mongolia 3,441 km, Norway 167
  km, Poland (Kaliningrad Oblast) 432 km, Ukraine 1,576 km 
Coastline: 
  37,653 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  inherited disputes from former USSR including: sections of the
  boundary with China; islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, and Shikotan and
  the Habomai group occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, administered
  by Russia, claimed by Japan; maritime dispute with Norway over portion
  of the Barents Sea; Russia may dispute current de facto maritime
  border of midpoint of Caspian Sea from shore; potential dispute with
  Ukraine over Crimea; has made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but
  has reserved the right to do so) and does not recognize the claims of
  any other nation
Climate: 
  ranges from steppes in the south through humid continental in much of
  European Russia; subarctic in Siberia to tundra climate in the polar
  north; winters vary from cool along Black Sea coast to frigid in
  Siberia; summers vary from warm in the steppes to cool along Arctic
  coast
Terrain: 
  broad plain with low hills west of Urals; vast coniferous forest and
  tundra in Siberia; uplands and mountains along southern border regions
Natural resources: 
  wide natural resource base including major deposits of oil, natural
  gas, coal, and many strategic minerals, timber 
note: 
  formidable obstacles of climate, terrain, and distance hinder
  exploitation of natural resources
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  NA%
forest and woodland: 
  NA%
other: 
  NA%
note: 
  agricultural land accounts for 13% of the total land area
Irrigated land: 
  56,000 sq km (1992)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from heavy industry, emissions of coal-fired electric
  plants, and transportation in major cities; industrial and
  agricultural pollution of inland waterways and sea coasts;
  deforestation; soil erosion; soil contamination from improper
  application of agricultural chemicals; scattered areas of sometimes
  intense radioactive contamination
natural hazards: 
  permafrost over much of Siberia is a major impediment to development
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Environmental Modification,
  Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea
Note: 
  largest country in the world in terms of area but unfavorably located
  in relation to major sea lanes of the world; despite its size, much of
  the country lacks proper soils and climates (either too cold or too
  dry) for agriculture

@Russia, People

Population: 
  149,608,953 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.2% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.67 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.34 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.7 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.89 years 
male: 
  63.85 years 
female: 
  74.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Russian(s) 
adjective: 
  Russian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Russian 81.5%, Tatar 3.8%, Ukrainian 3%, Chuvash 1.2%, Bashkir 0.9%,
  Byelorussian 0.8%, Moldavian 0.7%, other 8.1% 
Religions: 
  Russian Orthodox, Muslim, other 
Languages: 
  Russian, other 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  75 million (1993 est.)
by occupation: 
  production and economic services 83.9%, government 16.1%

@Russia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Russian Federation 
conventional short form: 
  Russia 
local long form: 
  Rossiyskaya Federatsiya 
local short form: 
  Rossiya 
former: 
  Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  RS
Type: 
  federation 
Capital: 
  Moscow 
Administrative divisions: 
  21 autonomous republics (avtomnykh respublik, singular - avtomnaya
  respublika); Adygea (Maykop), Bashkortostan (Ufa), Buryatia
  (Ulan-Ude), Chechenia (Groznyy), Chuvashia (Cheboksary), Dagestan
  (Makhachkala), Gorno-Altay (Gorno-Altaysk), Ingushetia (Nazran'),
  Kabardino-Balkaria (Nal'chik), Kalmykia (Elista), Karachay-Cherkessia
  (Cherkessk), Karelia (Petrozavodsk), Khakassia (Abakan), Komi
  (Syktyvkar), Mari El (Yoshkar-Ola), Mordovia (Saransk), North Ossetia
  (Vladikavkaz), Tatarstan (Kazan'), Tuva (Kyzyl), Udmurtia (Izhevsk),
  Yakutia (Yakutsk); 49 oblasts (oblastey, singular - oblast'); Amur
  (Blagoveshchensk), Arkhangel'sk, Astrakhan', Belgorod, Bryansk,
  Chelyabinsk, Chita, Irkutsk, Ivanovo, Kaliningrad, Kaluga, Kamchatka
  (Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy), Kemerovo, Kirov, Kostroma, Kurgan, Kursk,
  Leningrad (St. Petersburg), Lipetsk, Magadan, Moscow, Murmansk,
  Nizhniy Novgorod, Novgorod, Novosibirsk, Omsk, Orel, Orenburg, Penza,
  Perm', Pskov, Rostov, Ryazan', Sakhalin (Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk), Samara,
  Saratov, Smolensk, Sverdlovsk (Yekaterinburg), Tambov, Tomsk, Tula,
  Tver', Tyumen', Ul'yanovsk, Vladimir, Volgograd, Vologda, Voronezh,
  Yaroslavl'; 6 krays (krayev, singular - kray); Altay (Barnaul),
  Khabarovsk, Krasnodar, Krasnoyarsk, Primorskiy (Vladivostok),
  Stavropol'
note: 
  the autonomous republics of Chechenia and Ingushetia were formerly the
  automous republic of Checheno-Ingushetia (the boundary between
  Chechenia and Ingushetia has yet to be determined); the cities of
  Moscow and St. Petersburg are federal cities; an administrative
  division has the same name as its administrative center (exceptions
  have the administrative center name following in parentheses)
Independence: 
  24 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, June 12 (1990) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 12 December 1993
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Boris Nikolayevich YEL'TSIN (since 12 June 1991) election
  last held 12 June 1991 (next to be held 1996); results - percent of
  vote by party NA%; note - no vice president; if the president dies in
  office, cannot exercise his powers because of ill health, is
  impeached, or resigns, the premier succeeds him; the premier serves as
  acting president until a new presidential election, which must be held
  within three months
head of government: 
  Premier and Chairman of the Council of Ministers Viktor Stepanovich
  CHERNOMYRDIN (since 14 December 1992); First Deputy Chairman of the
  Council of Ministers Oleg SOSKOVETS (since 30 April 1993) 
Security Council: 
  (originally established as a presidential advisory body in June 1991,
  but restructured in March 1992 with responsibility for managing
  individual and state security)
Presidential Administration: 
  (drafts presidential edicts and provides staff and policy support to
  the entire executive branch)
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Group of Assistants: 
  (schedules president's appointments, processes presidential edicts and
  other official documents, and houses the president's press service and
  primary speechwriters)
Council of Heads of Republics: 
  (includes the leaders of the 21 ethnic-based Republics)
Council of Heads of Administrations: 
  (includes the leaders of the 68 autonomous territories and regions,
  and the mayors of Moscow and St. Petersburg)
Presidential Council: 
  (prepares policy papers for the president)
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Federal Assembly
Federation Council: 
  elections last held 12 December 1993 (next to be held NA); note - two
  members elected from each of Russia's 89 territorial units for a total
  of 176 deputies; 2 seats unfilled as of 15 May 1994 (Chechenia did not
  participate in the election); Speaker Vladimir SHUMEYKO (Russia's
  Choice)
State Duma: 
  elections last held 12 December 1993 (next to be held NA December
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (450 total)
  Russia's Choice 78, New Regional Policy 66, Liberal Democrats 63,
  Agrarian Party 55, Communist Party of the Russian Federation 45, Unity
  and Accord 30, Yavlinskiy Bloc 27, Women of Russia 23, Democratic
  Party of Russia 15, Russia's Path 12, other parties 23, affiliation
  unknown 12, unfilled (as of 13 March 1994; Chechnya did not
  participate in the election) 1; Speaker Ivan RYBKIN (Agrarian Party)
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court, Supreme Court (highest court for criminal,
  civil, and administrative cases), Superior Court of Arbitration
  (highest court that resolves economic disputes)
Political parties and leaders: 
pro-market democrats: 
  Party of Russian Unity and Accord, Sergey SHAKHRAY; Russia's Choice
  electoral association, Yegor GAYDAR; Russian Movement for Democratic
  Reforms electoral association, Anatoliy SOBCHAK;
  Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin Bloc electoral association, Grigoriy
  YAVLINSKIY
centrists/special interest parties: 
  Civic Union for Stability, Justice, and Progress, Arkadiy VOL'SKIY;
  Constructive-Ecological Movement of Russia, Anatoliy PANFILOV;
  Democratic Party of Russia, Nikolay TRAVKIN; Dignity and Charity
  Federal Political Movement, Konstantin FROLOV; Russia's Future-New
  Names electoral association, Vyacheslav LASHCHEVSKIY; Women of Russia
  Party, Alevtina FEDULOVA
anti-market and/or ultranationalist parties: 
  Agrarian Party, Mikhail LAPSHIN; Communist Party of the Russian
  Federation, Gennadiy ZYUGANOV; Liberal Democratic Party of Russia,
  Vladimir ZHIRINOVSKIY
note: 
  more than 20 political parties and associations tried to gather enough
  signatures to run slates of candidates in the 12 December 1993
  legislative elections, but only 13 succeeded
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  BSEC, CBSS, CCC, CE (guest), CERN (observer), CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE,
  ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NACC, NSG,
  OAS (observer), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMOZ,
  UNPROFOR, UN Security Council, UNTAC, UN Trusteeship Council, UNTSO,
  UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Vladimir Petrovich LUKIN 
chancery: 
  1125 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 628-7551 and 8548 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York, San Francisco, and Seattle 
consulate(s): 
  Washington 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Thomas R. PICKERING 
embassy: 
  Novinskiy Bul'var 19/23, Moscow 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09721 
telephone: 
  [7] (095) 252-2451 through 2459 
FAX: 
  [7] (095)-4261/4270 
consulate(s): 
  St. Petersburg, Vladivostok 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red

@Russia, Economy

Overview: 
  Russia, a vast country with a wealth of natural resources, a
  well-educated population, and a diverse industrial base, continues to
  experience severe difficulties in moving from its old centrally
  planned economy to a modern market economy. President YEL'TSIN's
  government has made some progress toward a market economy by freeing
  most prices, slashing defense spending, unifying foreign exchange
  rates, and launching an ambitious privatization program. Yet much of
  the old order persists and YEL'TSIN faces formidable opposition to
  further measures such as the reduction of subsidies to old-line
  industries. Output continues to fall although the mix is gradually
  becoming more responsive to Russia's needs. According to Russian
  official data, GDP declined by 12% in 1993 compared with 19% in 1992.
  Industrial output in 1993 fell 16% with all major sectors taking a
  hit. Agricultural production, meanwhile, was down 6%. The grain
  harvest totalled 99 million tons - some 8 million tons less than in
  1992. Unemployment climbed in 1993 but remained low by Western
  standards. The official number of unemployed rose from 578,000 at the
  beginning of 1993 to about 1 million - or roughly 1.4% of the work
  force - by yearend. According to the Russian labor minister, the
  actual number of unemployed probably was closer to 4 million.
  Government fears of large-scale unemployment continued to hamper
  industrial restructuring efforts. According to official statistics,
  average real wages remained flat. Nonetheless, a substantial portion
  of the population, particularly the elderly and people in remote
  areas, finds its well-being steadily shrinking. The disparity in
  incomes between the rich and poor continued to rise in 1993, primarily
  reflecting the high earnings of enterprise managers and persons
  employed in the emerging private sector. The government tried to
  narrow the income gap by raising the wages of budget-funded workers -
  mainly teachers and health care specialists. Official data may
  overstate hardships, because many Russians supplement their income by
  moonlighting or by bartering goods and services, activities that often
  go unreported. Russia made good progress on privatization in 1993
  despite active opposition from key cabinet members, hard-line
  legislators, and antireform regional leaders. By yearend, for example,
  roughly 35% of Russia's medium and large state enterprises had been
  auctioned, while the number of private farms in Russia increased by
  86,000, reaching a total of 170,000. As a result, about 6% of
  agricultural land now has been privatized. Financial stabilization
  continued to remain a challenge for the government. Moscow tightened
  financial policies in early 1993 - including postponing planned budget
  spending - and succeeded in reducing monthly inflation from 27% in
  January to 20% in May and June. In the summer, however, the government
  relaxed austerity measures in the face of mounting pressure from
  industry and agriculture, sparking a new round of inflation; the
  monthly inflation rate jumped to 25% in August. In response, Moscow
  announced a package of measures designed to curb government spending
  and inflation. It included eliminating bread subsidies, delaying
  payment obligations, raising interest rates, and phasing out
  concessionary Central Bank credits to enterprises and regions. The
  measures met with some success; the monthly inflation rate declined to
  13% in December. According to official statistics, Russia's 1993 trade
  with nations outside the former Soviet Union produced a $16 billion
  surplus, up from $6 billion in 1992. Moscow arrested the steep drop in
  exports that it had been suffering as a result of ruptured ties with
  former trading partners, output declines, and erratic efforts to move
  to world prices. Foreign sales - comprised largely of oil, natural
  gas, and other raw materials - grew slightly. Imports were down by 15%
  or so as a result of new import taxes and Moscow's reluctance to
  increase its debt burden by purchasing grain and other goods with
  foreign credits. Russian trade with other former Soviet republics
  continued to decline and yielded a surplus of some $5 billion. At the
  same time, Russia paid only a fraction of the roughly $20 billion in
  debt coming due in 1993, and by mid-year, Russia's foreign debt had
  amounted to $81.5 billion. While Moscow reached agreement to
  restructure debts with Paris Club official creditors in April 1993,
  Moscow's refusal to waive its right to sovereign immunity kept Russia
  and its bank creditors from agreeing to restructure Moscow's
  commercial loans. Capital flight continued to be a serious problem in
  1993, with billions of dollars in assets owned by Russians being
  parked abroad at yearend. Russia's capital stock continues to
  deteriorate because of insufficient maintenance and new construction.
  The capital stock on average is twice the age of capital stock in the
  West. Many years will pass before Russia can take full advantage of
  its natural resources and its human assets.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $775.4 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Russian statistics, which are very
  uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -12% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,190 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  21% per month (average 1993); 13% per month (December 1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  1.4% (1 January 1994; official data)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $43 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  petroleum and petroleum products, natural gas, wood and wood products,
  metals, chemicals, and a wide variety of civilian and military
  manufactures
partners: 
  Europe, North America, Japan, Third World countries, Cuba
Imports: 
  $27 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, consumer goods, grain, meat,
  sugar, semifinished metal products
partners: 
  Europe, North America, Japan, Third World countries, Cuba
External debt: 
  $81.5 billion (mid-year 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -16% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  213,000,000 KW
production: 
  956 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,782 kWh (1 January 1992)
Industries: 
  complete range of mining and extractive industries producing coal,
  oil, gas, chemicals, and metals; all forms of machine building from
  rolling mills to high-performance aircraft and space vehicles; ship-
  building; road and rail transportation equipment; communications
  equipment; agricultural machinery, tractors, and construction
  equipment; electric power generating and transmitting equipment;
  medical and scientific instruments; consumer durables
Agriculture: 
  grain, sugar beet, sunflower seeds, meat, milk, vegetables, fruits;
  because of its northern location does not grow citrus, cotton, tea,
  and other warm climate products
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for domestic
  consumption; government has active eradication program; used as
  transshipment point for Asian and Latin American illicit drugs to
  Western Europe and Latin America
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (1990-93), $13 billion; other
  countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1988-93), $115 billion 
Currency: 
  1 ruble (R) = 100 kopeks
Exchange rates: 
  rubles per US$1 - 1,247 (27 December 1993), 415 (24 December 1992);
  nominal exchange rate still deteriorating but real exchange rate
  strengthening
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Russia, Communications

Railroads: 
  158,100 km all 1.520-meter broad gauge; 86,800 km in common carrier
  service, of which 48,900 km are diesel traction and 37,900 km are
  electric traction; 71,300 km serves specific industry and is not
  available for common carrier use (30 June 1993)
Highways: 
total: 
  893,000 km 
paved and gravel: 
  677,000 km 
unpaved: 
  216,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  total navigable routes in general use 100,000 km; routes with
  navigation guides serving the Russian River Fleet 95,900 km; of which
  routes with night navigational aids 60,400 km; man-made navigable
  routes 16,900 km (30 June 1993)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 48,000 km; petroleum products 15,000 km; natural gas 140,000
  km (30 June 1993)
Ports: 
  coastal - St. Petersburg, Kaliningrad, Murmansk, Petropavlovsk,
  Arkhangel'sk, Novorossiysk, Vladivostok, Nakhodka, Kholmsk, Korsakov,
  Magadan, Tiksi, Tuapse, Vanino, Vostochnyy, Vyborg; inland -
  Astrakhan', Nizhniy Novgorod, Kazan', Khabarovsk, Krasnoyarsk, Samara,
  Moscow, Rostov, Volgograd
Merchant marine: 
  867 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 8,084,988 GRT/11,124,929 DWT,
  barge carrier 2, bulk cargo 26, cargo 454, chemical tanker 9,
  combination bulk 28, combination ore/oil 16, container 82,
  multi-function large load carrier 3, oil tanker 125, passenger 6,
  passenger cargo 5, refrigerated cargo 17, roll-on/roll-off cargo 74,
  short-sea passenger 18, specialized tanker 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  2,550 
usable: 
  964 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  565 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  19 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  275 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  426 
Telecommunications: 
  Russia is enlisting foreign help, by means of joint ventures, to speed
  up the modernization of its telecommunications system; NMT-450 analog
  cellular telephone networks are operational and growing in Moscow and
  St. Petersburg; expanded access to international E-mail service
  available via Sprint network; intercity fiberoptic cable installation
  remains limited; the inadequacy of Russian telecommunications is a
  severe handicap to the economy, especially with respect to
  international connections; total installed telephones 24,400,000, of
  which in urban areas 20,900,000 and in rural areas 3,500,000; of
  these, total installed in homes 15,400,000; total pay phones for long
  distant calls 34,100; telephone density is about 164 telephones per
  1,000 persons (in 1992, only 661,000 new telephones were installed
  compared with 855,000 in 1991 and in 1992 the number of unsatisfied
  applications for telephones reached 11,000,000); international traffic
  is handled by an inadequate system of satellites, land lines,
  microwave radio relay and outdated submarine cables; this traffic
  passes through the international gateway switch in Moscow which
  carries most of the international traffic for the other countries of
  the Commonwealth of Independent States; a new Russian Raduga satellite
  will link Moscow and St. Petersburg with Rome from whence calls will
  be relayed to destinations in Europe and overseas; satellite ground
  stations - INTELSAT, Intersputnik, Eutelsat (Moscow), INMARSAT,
  Orbita; broadcast stations - 1,050 AM/FM/SW (reach 98.6% of
  population), 7,183 TV; receiving sets - 54,200,000 TVs, 48,800,000
  radio receivers, 74,300,000 radio receivers with multiple speaker
  systems for program diffusion

@Russia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Ground Forces, Navy, Air Forces, Air Defense Forces, Strategic Rocket
  Forces, Command and General Support, Security Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 37,706,825; fit for military service 29,623,429; reach
  military age (18) annually 1,098,307 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Rwanda, Geography

Location: 
  Central Africa, between Tanzania and Zaire
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  26,340 sq km 
land area: 
  24,950 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 893 km, Burundi 290 km, Tanzania 217 km, Uganda 169 km, Zaire
  217 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate; two rainy seasons (February to April, November to January);
  mild in mountains with frost and snow possible
Terrain: 
  mostly grassy uplands and hills; mountains in west
Natural resources: 
  gold, cassiterite (tin ore), wolframite (tungsten ore), natural gas,
  hydropower 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  29% 
permanent crops: 
  11% 
meadows and pastures: 
  18% 
forest and woodland: 
  10% 
other: 
  32% 
Irrigated land: 
  40 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil exhaustion; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; predominantly rural population

@Rwanda, People

Population: 
  8,373,963 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  the demographic estimates were prepared before civil strife, starting
  in April 1994, set in motion substantial and continuing population
  changes
Population growth rate: 
  2.78% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  49.17 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  21.35 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  118.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  40.25 years 
male: 
  39.33 years 
female: 
  41.21 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  8.19 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Rwandan(s) 
adjective: 
  Rwandan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Hutu 90%, Tutsi 9%, Twa (Pygmoid) 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 65%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 1%, indigenous beliefs and
  other 25% 
Languages: 
  Kinyarwanda (official), French (official), Kiswahili used in
  commercial centers
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  50% 
male: 
  64% 
female: 
  37% 
Labor force: 
  3.6 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 93%, government and services 5%, industry and commerce 2%
note: 
  49% of population of working age (1985)

@Rwanda, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Rwanda 
conventional short form: 
  Rwanda 
local long form: 
  Republika y'u Rwanda 
local short form: 
  Rwanda 
Digraph: 
  RW
Type: 
  republic; presidential system
note: 
  a new, interim government formed in August 1992 to last until peace
  accord; political parties are working to form a multiethical
  broad-based transitonal government to lead them to elections in 1995
Capital: 
  Kigali 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 prefectures (prefectures, singular - prefecture in French; plural -
  NA, singular - prefegitura in Kinyarwanda); Butare, Byumba, Cyangugu,
  Gikongoro, Gisenyi, Gitarama, Kibungo, Kibuye, Kigali, Ruhengeri
Independence: 
  1 July 1962 (from UN trusteeship under Belgian administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 July (1962) 
Constitution: 
  18 June 1991
Legal system: 
  based on German and Belgian civil law systems and customary law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Interim President Dr. Theodore SINDIKUBWABO (since 8 April 1994,
  following the death of President Juvenal HABYARIMANA on 6 April 1994)
  the last election was held 19 December 1988 (next planned for 1995);
  results - the late President Juvenal HABYARIMANA was reelected
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Jean KAMBANDA, appointed by President SINDIKUBWABWO 8
  April 1994 following the assassination of Agatha UWILINGIYIMANA on 7
  April 1994 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Development Council: 
  (Conseil National de Developpement) elections last held 19 December
  1988 (new elections to be held in 1995); results - MRND was the only
  party; seats - (70 total) MRND 70
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court (consists of the Court of Cassation and the
  Council of State in joint session)
Political parties and leaders: 
  Republican National Movement for Democracy and Development (MRND);
  significant independent parties include: Democratic Republican
  Movement (MDR); Liberal Party (PL); Democratic and Socialist Party
  (PSD); Coalition for the Defense of the Republic (CDR); Party for
  Democracy in Rwanda (PADER); Christian Democratic Party (PDL)
note: 
  formerly a one-party state, Rwanda legalized independent parties in
  mid-1991; since then, at least 10 new political parties have
  registered 
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF), Alexis KANYARENGWE, Chairman (since
  1990); Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA), the RPF military wing, Maj. Gen.
  Paul KAGAME, commander
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, ECA, CCC, CEEAC, CEPGL, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS,
  NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Aloys UWIMANA 
chancery: 
  1714 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 232-2882 
FAX: 
  (202) 232-4544 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
embassy: 
  Boulevard de la Revolution, Kigali 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 28, Kigali 
telephone: 
  [250] 75601 through 75603 
FAX: 
  [250] 72128 
note: 
  embassy closed on 10 April 1994 and personnel withdrawn because of
  severe civil strife and consequent danger for foreign nationals
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side), yellow, and green with
  a large black letter R centered in the yellow band; uses the popular
  pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the flag of Guinea, which
  has a plain yellow band

@Rwanda, Economy

Overview: 
  Almost 50% of GDP comes from the agricultural sector; coffee and tea
  make up 80-90% of total exports. The amount of fertile land is
  limited, however, and deforestation and soil erosion have created
  problems. The industrial sector in Rwanda is small, contributing only
  17% to GDP. Manufacturing focuses mainly on the processing of
  agricultural products. The Rwandan economy remains dependent on
  coffee/tea exports and foreign aid. Weak international prices since
  1986 have caused the economy to contract and per capita GDP to
  decline. A structural adjustment program with the World Bank began in
  October 1990. Ethnic-based insurgency in 1990-93 devastated wide areas
  of the north and displaced hundreds of thousands of people. A peace
  accord in mid-1993 temporarily ended most of the fighting, but massive
  resumption of civil warfare in April 1994 in the capital city Kigali
  has been taking thousands of lives and severely damaging short-term
  economic prospects
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.3% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.5% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $350 million 
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  $66.6 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  coffee 63%, tea, cassiterite, wolframite, pyrethrum
partners: 
  Germany, Belgium, Italy, Uganda, UK, France, US
Imports: 
  $259.5 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  textiles, foodstuffs, machines and equipment, capital goods, steel,
  petroleum products, cement and construction material
partners: 
  US, Belgium, Germany, Kenya, Japan
External debt: 
  $845 million (1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2.2% (1991); accounts for 17% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  30,000 kW
production: 
  130 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  15 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  mining of cassiterite (tin ore) and wolframite (tungsten ore), tin,
  cement, agricultural processing, small-scale beverage production,
  soap, furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles, cigarettes
Agriculture: 
  accounts for almost 50% of GDP and about 90% of the labor force; cash
  crops - coffee, tea, pyrethrum (insecticide made from chrysanthemums);
  main food crops - bananas, beans, sorghum, potatoes; stock raising;
  self-sufficiency declining; country imports foodstuffs as farm
  production fails to keep up with a 2.8% annual growth in population
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $128 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $45 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $58 million 
note: 
  in October 1990 Rwanda launched a Structural Adjustment Program with
  the IMF; since September 1991, the EC has given $46 million and the US
  $25 million in support of this program (1993)
Currency: 
  1 Rwandan franc (RF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Rwandan francs (RF) per US$1 - 145.45 (December 1993), 133.35 (1992),
  125.14 (1991), 82.60 (1990), 79.98 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Rwanda, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  4,885 km 
paved: 
  460 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 1,725 km; unimproved earth 2,700 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Lac Kivu navigable by shallow-draft barges and native craft
Airports: 
total: 
  8 
usable: 
  7 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  telephone system does not provide service to the general public but is
  intended for business and government use; the capital, Kigali, is
  connected to the centers of the prefectures by microwave radio relay;
  the remainder of the network depends on wire and high frequency radio;
  international connections employ microwave radio relay to neighboring
  countries and satellite communications to more distant countries;
  satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 1 SYMPHONIE
  station in Kigali (includes telex and telefax service); broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV

@Rwanda, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (including Air Wing), Gendarmerie 
note: 
  Rwanda plans to demobilize and reorganize with RPF elements during
  1994
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,733,246; fit for military service 883,291 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $37 million, 1.6% of GDP (1988 est.)


@Saint Helena

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Saint Helena, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the South Atlantic Ocean, 1,920 km west of Angola,
  about two-thirds of the way between South America and Africa
Map references: 
  Africa 
Area: 
total area: 
  410 sq km 
land area: 
  410 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 2.3 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Ascension, Gough Island, Inaccessible Island, Nightingale
  Island, and Tristan da Cunha
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  60 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; marine; mild, tempered by trade winds
Terrain: 
  rugged, volcanic; small scattered plateaus and plains
Natural resources: 
  fish; Ascension is a breeding ground for sea turtles and sooty terns,
  no minerals 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  83% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  active volcanism on Tristan da Cunha
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  Napoleon Bonaparte's place of exile and burial (the remains were taken
  to Paris in 1840); harbors at least 40 species of plants unknown
  anywhere else in the world

@Saint Helena, People

Population: 
  6,741 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.31% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  9.64 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.55 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  37.24 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.75 years 
male: 
  72.68 years 
female: 
  76.58 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.14 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Saint Helenian(s) 
adjective: 
  Saint Helenian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  NA
Religions: 
  Anglican (majority), Baptist, Seventh-Day Adventist, Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1987)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  2,516 
by occupation: 
  professional, technical, and related workers 8.7%, managerial,
  administrative, and clerical 12.8%, sales people 8.1%, farmer,
  fishermen, etc. 5.4%, craftspersons, production process workers 14.7%,
  others 50.3% (1987)

@Saint Helena, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Saint Helena 
Digraph: 
  SH
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Jamestown 
Administrative divisions: 
  1 administrative area and 2 dependencies*; Ascension*, Saint Helena,
  Tristan da Cunha*
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen, 10 June 1989 (second
  Saturday in June) 
Constitution: 
  1 January 1989
Legal system: 
  NA 
Suffrage: 
  NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
head of government: 
  Governor A. N. HOOLE (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council: 
  elections last held October 1984 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (15 total, 12 elected) number of
  seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Saint Helena Labor Party; Saint Helena Progressive Party
note: 
  both political parties inactive since 1976
Member of: 
  ICFTU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  Saint Helenian shield centered on the outer half of the flag; the
  shield features a rocky coastline and three-masted sailing ship

@Saint Helena, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy depends primarily on financial assistance from the UK. The
  local population earns some income from fishing, the raising of
  livestock, and sales of handicrafts. Because there are few jobs, a
  large proportion of the work force has left to seek employment
  overseas.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  -1.1% (1986)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $3.2 million 
expenditures: 
  $2.9 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1984 est.)
Exports: 
  $23,900 (f.o.b., 1984)
commodities: 
  fish (frozen and salt-dried skipjack, tuna), handicrafts
partners: 
  South Africa, UK
Imports: 
  $2.4 million (c.i.f., 1984)
commodities: 
  food, beverages, tobacco, fuel oils, animal feed, building materials,
  motor vehicles and parts, machinery and parts
partners: 
  UK, South Africa
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  9,800 kW
production: 
  10 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,390 kWh (1989)
Industries: 
  crafts (furniture, lacework, fancy woodwork), fishing
Agriculture: 
  maize, potatoes, vegetables; timber production being developed;
  crawfishing on Tristan da Cunha
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1992-93), $13.5 million 
Currency: 
  1 Saint Helenian pound (#S) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  Saint Helenian pounds (#S) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6033
  (1993), 0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989);
  note - the Saint Helenian pound is at par with the British pound
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Saint Helena, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA (mainland 107 km, Ascension NA, Tristan da Cunha NA)
paved: 
  169.7 km (mainland 87 km, Ascension 80 km, Tristan da Cunha 2.70 km)
unpaved: 
  NA (mainland 20 km earth roads, Ascension NA, Tristan da Cunha NA)
Ports: 
  Jamestown (Saint Helena), Georgetown (Ascension)
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  1,500 radio receivers; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV; 550
  telephones in automatic network; HF radio links to Ascension, then
  into worldwide submarine cable and satellite networks; major coaxial
  submarine cable relay point between South Africa, Portugal, and UK at
  Ascension; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@Saint Helena, Defense Forces
Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Saint Kitts and Nevis, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about one-third of the way
  between Puerto Rico and Trinidad and Tobago
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  269 sq km 
land area: 
  269 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  135 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical tempered by constant sea breezes; little seasonal
  temperature variation; rainy season (May to November)
Terrain: 
  volcanic with mountainous interiors
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  22% 
permanent crops: 
  17% 
meadows and pastures: 
  3% 
forest and woodland: 
  17% 
other: 
  41% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes (July to October)
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection

@Saint Kitts and Nevis, People

Population: 
  40,671 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.72% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  23.7 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.98 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  19.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  66.11 years 
male: 
  63.14 years 
female: 
  69.27 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.6 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Kittsian(s), Nevisian(s) 
adjective: 
  Kittsian, Nevisian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black African 
Religions: 
  Anglican, other Protestant sects, Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  98% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  20,000 (1981)

@Saint Kitts and Nevis, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis 
conventional short form: 
  Saint Kitts and Nevis 
former: 
  Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis 
Digraph: 
  SC
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Basseterre 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 parishs; Christ Church Nichola Town, Saint Anne Sandy Point, Saint
  George Basseterre, Saint George Gingerland, Saint James Windward,
  Saint John Capesterre, Saint John Figtree, Saint Mary Cayon, Saint
  Paul Capesterre, Saint Paul Charlestown, Saint Peter Basseterre, Saint
  Thomas Lowland, Saint Thomas Middle Island, Trinity Palmetto Point
Independence: 
  19 September 1983 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 19 September (1983) 
Constitution: 
  19 September 1983
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Sir Clement Athelston ARRINDELL (since 19 September 1983,
  previously Governor General of the Associated State since NA November
  1981) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Dr. Kennedy Alphonse SIMMONDS (since 19 September 1983,
  previously Premier of the Associated State since NA February 1980);
  Deputy Prime Minister Sydney Earl MORRIS (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general in consultation with the
  prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 29 November 1993 (next to be held by 21 March
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (14 total, 11
  elected) PAM 4, SKNLP 4, NRP 1, CCM 2
Judicial branch: 
  Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's Action Movement (PAM), Dr. Kennedy SIMMONDS; Saint Kitts and
  Nevis Labor Party (SKNLP), Dr. Denzil DOUGLAS; Nevis Reformation Party
  (NRP), Simeon DANIEL; Concerned Citizens Movement (CCM), Vance AMORY
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IMF,
  INTERPOL, LORCS, OAS, OECS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Minister-Counselor (Deputy Chief of Mission), Charge
  d'Affaires ad interim Aubrey Eric HART 
chancery: 
  Suite 608, 2100 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20037 
telephone: 
  (202) 833-3550 
FAX: 
  (202) 833-3553 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no official presence since the Charge d'Affaires resides in Saint
  John's (Antigua and Barbuda)
Flag: 
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side by a broad black band
  bearing two white five-pointed stars; the black band is edged in
  yellow; the upper triangle is green, the lower triangle is red

@Saint Kitts and Nevis, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy has historically depended on the growing and processing of
  sugarcane and on remittances from overseas workers. In recent years,
  tourism and export-oriented manufacturing have assumed larger roles.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $163 million (1992)
National product real growth rate: 
  4.1% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $4,000 (1992)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.9% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  12.2% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $85.7 million 
expenditures: 
  $85.8 million, including capital expenditures of $42.4 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $32.4 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  sugar, clothing, electronics, postage stamps
partners: 
  US 53%, UK 22%, Trinidad and Tobago 5%, OECS 5% (1988)
Imports: 
  $100 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, intermediate manufactures, machinery, fuels
partners: 
  US 36%, UK 17%, Trinidad and Tobago 6%, Canada 3%, Japan 3%, OECS 4%
  (1988)
External debt: 
  $43.3 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 11.8% (1988 est.); accounts for 11% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  15,800 kW
production: 
  45 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,120 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  sugar processing, tourism, cotton, salt, copra, clothing, footwear,
  beverages
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 7% of GDP; cash crop - sugarcane; subsistence crops -
  rice, yams, vegetables, bananas; fishing potential not fully
  exploited; most food imported
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for South American drugs destined for the US
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY85-88), $10.7 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $67
  million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Saint Kitts and Nevis, Communications

Railroads: 
  58 km 0.760-meter gauge on Saint Kitts for sugarcane
Highways: 
total: 
  300 km 
paved: 
  125 km 
unpaved: 
  otherwise improved 125 km; unimproved earth 50 km 
Ports: 
  Basseterre (Saint Kitts), Charlestown (Nevis)
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  good interisland VHF/UHF/SHF radio connections and international link
  via Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Martin; 2,400 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 2 AM, no FM, 4 TV

@Saint Kitts and Nevis, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Police Force, Coast Guard 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Saint Lucia, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about two-thirds of the way
  between Puerto Rico and Trinidad and Tobago
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  620 sq km 
land area: 
  610 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  158 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical, moderated by northeast trade winds; dry season from January
  to April, rainy season from May to August
Terrain: 
  volcanic and mountainous with some broad, fertile valleys
Natural resources: 
  forests, sandy beaches, minerals (pumice), mineral springs, geothermal
  potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  20% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  13% 
other: 
  54% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes and volcanic activity
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Whaling

@Saint Lucia, People

Population: 
  145,090 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.52% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  23.12 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.84 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -12.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.36 years 
male: 
  67.06 years 
female: 
  71.83 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.5 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Saint Lucian(s) 
adjective: 
  Saint Lucian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African descent 90.3%, mixed 5.5%, East Indian 3.2%, Caucasian 0.8% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 90%, Protestant 7%, Anglican 3% 
Languages: 
  English (official), French patois 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1980)
total population: 
  67% 
male: 
  65% 
female: 
  69% 
Labor force: 
  43,800 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 43.4%, services 38.9%, industry and commerce 17.7% (1983
  est.)

@Saint Lucia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Saint Lucia 
Digraph: 
  ST
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Castries 
Administrative divisions: 
  11 quarters; Anse La Raye, Castries, Choiseul, Dauphin, Dennery, Gros
  Islet, Laborie, Micoud, Praslin, Soufriere, Vieux Fort
Independence: 
  22 February 1979 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 22 February (1979) 
Constitution: 
  22 February 1979
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Sir Stanislaus Anthony JAMES (since 10 October 1988) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister John George Melvin COMPTON (since 3 May 1982); Vice
  President George MALLET (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on advice of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  consists of an 11-member body, 6 appointed on the advice of the prime
  minister, 3 on the advice of the leader of the opposition, and 2 after
  consultation with religious, economic, and social groups
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 27 April 1992 (next to be held by April 1997);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (17 total) UWP 11, SLP
  6
Judicial branch: 
  Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  United Workers' Party (UWP), John COMPTON; Saint Lucia Labor Party
  (SLP), Julian HUNTE; Progressive Labor Party (PLP), George ODLUM
Member of: 
  ACCT (associate), ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory
  user), INTERPOL, LORCS, NAM, OAS, OECS, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dr. Joseph Edsel EDMUNDS 
chancery: 
  Suite 309, 2100 M Street NW, Washington, DC 30037 
telephone: 
  (202) 463-7378 or 7379 
FAX: 
  (202) 887-5746 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no official presence since the Ambassador resides in Bridgetown
  (Barbados)
Flag: 
  blue with a gold isosceles triangle below a black arrowhead; the upper
  edges of the arrowhead have a white border

@Saint Lucia, Economy

Overview: 
  Since 1983 the economy has shown an impressive average annual growth
  rate of almost 5% because of strong agricultural and tourist sectors.
  Saint Lucia also possesses an expanding industrial base supported by
  foreign investment in manufacturing and other activities, such as data
  processing. The economy, however, remains vulnerable because the
  important agricultural sector is dominated by banana production, which
  is subject to periodic droughts and tropical storms. The economy
  exhibited relatively strong growth in 1992-93 based on a recovery of
  the agricultural and manufacturing sectors and continued growth in
  construction and tourism.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $433 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.6% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5.1% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $121 million 
expenditures: 
  $127 million, including capital expenditures of $104 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $122.8 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  bananas 60%, clothing, cocoa, vegetables, fruits, coconut oil
partners: 
  UK 56%, US 22%, CARICOM 19% (1991)
Imports: 
  $276 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods 21%, machinery and transportation equipment 21%,
  food and live animals, chemicals, fuels
partners: 
  US 34%, CARICOM 17%, UK 14%, Japan 7%, Canada 4% (1991)
External debt: 
  $96.4 million (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.5% (1990 est.); accounts for 12% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  32,500 kW
production: 
  112 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  740 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  clothing, assembly of electronic components, beverages, corrugated
  cardboard boxes, tourism, lime processing, coconut processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 14% of GDP and 43% of labor force; crops - bananas,
  coconuts, vegetables, citrus fruit, root crops, cocoa; imports food
  for the tourist industry
Illicit drugs: 
  transit country for South American drugs destined for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $120 million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)

@Saint Lucia, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  760 km 
paved: 
  500 km 
unpaved: 
  otherwise improved  260 km 
Ports: 
  Castries, Vieux Fort
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  fully automatic telephone system; 9,500 telephones; direct microwave
  link with Martinique and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; interisland
  troposcatter link to Barbados; broadcast stations - 4 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV
  (cable)

@Saint Lucia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Saint Lucia Police Force, Coast Guard 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Saint Pierre and Miquelon

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territorial collectivity of France) 

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Geography

Location: 
  Northern North America, in the North Atlantic Ocean, 25 km south of
  Newfoundland (Canada)
Map references: 
  North America 
Area: 
total area: 
  242 sq km 
land area: 
  242 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC
note: 
  includes eight small islands in the Saint Pierre and the Miquelon
  groups
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  120 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  focus of maritime boundary dispute between Canada and France
Climate: 
  cold and wet, with much mist and fog; spring and autumn are windy
Terrain: 
  mostly barren rock
Natural resources: 
  fish, deepwater ports 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  13% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  83% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  vegetation scanty

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon, People

Population: 
  6,704 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.78% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.23 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.98 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  11.72 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.6 years 
male: 
  73.99 years 
female: 
  77.55 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.7 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Frenchman(men), Frenchwoman(women) 
adjective: 
  French 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Basques and Bretons (French fishermen)
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 98% 
Languages: 
  French 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1982)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  2,850 (1988)
by occupation: 
  NA 

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territorial Collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
conventional short form: 
  Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
local long form: 
  Departement de Saint-Pierre et Miquelon 
local short form: 
  Saint-Pierre et Miquelon 
Digraph: 
  SB
Type: 
  territorial collectivity of France 
Capital: 
  Saint-Pierre 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
Independence: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France; has been under French
  control since 1763)
National holiday: 
  National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July 
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  Commissioner of the Republic Yves HENRY (since NA December 1993);
  President of the General Council Marc PLANTE-GENEST (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
General Council: 
  elections last held September-October 1988 (next to be held NA
  September 1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (19
  total) Socialist and other left-wing parties 13, UDF and right-wing
  parties 6
French Senate: 
  elections last held NA September 1986 (next to be held NA September
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) PS 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1993 (next to be held NA June
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) UDF 1;
  note - Saint Pierre and Miquelon elects 1 member each to the French
  Senate and the French National Assembly who are voting members
Judicial branch: 
  Superior Tribunal of Appeals (Tribunal Superieur d'Appel) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Socialist Party (PS), Albert PEN; Union for French Democracy
  (UDF/CDS), Gerard GRIGNON
Member of: 
  FZ, WFTU 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territorial collectivity of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Economy

Overview: 
  The inhabitants have traditionally earned their livelihood by fishing
  and by servicing fishing fleets operating off the coast of
  Newfoundland. The economy has been declining, however, because the
  number of ships stopping at Saint Pierre has dropped steadily over the
  years. In March 1989, an agreement between France and Canada set fish
  quotas for Saint Pierre's trawlers fishing in Canadian and
  Canadian-claimed waters for three years. The agreement settles a
  longstanding dispute that had virtually brought fish exports to a
  halt. The islands are heavily subsidized by France. Imports come
  primarily from Canada and France.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $65 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $10,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  9.6% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $18.3 million 
expenditures: 
  $18.3 million, including capital expenditures of $5.5 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $30 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  fish and fish products, fox and mink pelts
partners: 
  US 58%, France 17%, UK 11%, Canada, Portugal (1990)
Imports: 
  $82 million (c.i.f., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  meat, clothing, fuel, electrical equipment, machinery, building
  materials
partners: 
  Canada, France, US, Netherlands, UK
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,000 kW
production: 
  25 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,840 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  fish processing and supply base for fishing fleets; tourism
Agriculture: 
  vegetables, cattle, sheep, pigs for local consumption; fish catch of
  20,500 metric tons (1989)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $500 million 
Currency: 
  1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  French francs (F) per US$1 - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993),
  5.2938 (1992), 5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  120 km 
paved: 
  60 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 60 km (1985)
Ports: 
  Saint Pierre
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  3,601 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, 3 FM, no TV; radio
  communication with most countries in the world; 1 earth station in
  French domestic satellite system

@Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea about three-fourths of the way
  between Puerto Rico and Trinidad and Tobago
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  340 sq km 
land area: 
  340 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  84 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season (May to
  November)
Terrain: 
  volcanic, mountainous; Soufriere volcano on the island of Saint
  Vincent
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  38% 
permanent crops: 
  12% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  41% 
other: 
  3% 
Irrigated land: 
  10 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  pollution of coastal waters and shorelines from discharges by pleasure
  yachts and other effluents
natural hazards: 
  subject to hurricanes; Soufriere volcano is a constant threat
international agreements: 
  party to - Law of the Sea, Ship Pollution, Whaling
Note: 
  some islands of the Grenadines group are administered by Grenada

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, People

Population: 
  115,437 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.77% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  20.27 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -7.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  17.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.28 years 
male: 
  70.77 years 
female: 
  73.84 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.08 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Saint Vincentian(s) or Vincentian(s) 
adjective: 
  Saint Vincentian or Vincentian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black African descent, white, East Indian, Carib Indian 
Religions: 
  Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Seventh-Day Adventist 
Languages: 
  English, French patois 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  96% 
male: 
  96% 
female: 
  96% 
Labor force: 
  67,000 (1984 est.)
by occupation: 
  NA

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
Digraph: 
  VC
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Kingstown 
Administrative divisions: 
  6 parishes; Charlotte, Grenadines, Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint
  George, Saint Patrick
Independence: 
  27 October 1979 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 October (1979) 
Constitution: 
  27 October 1979
Legal system: 
  based on English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General David JACK (since 29 September 1989) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister James F. MITCHELL (since 30 July 1984); Deputy Prime
  Minister Allan C. CRUICKSHANK (since NA); note - governor general
  appoints leader of the majority party to position of prime minister
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 February 1994 (next to be held NA July 1999);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (21 total; 15 elected
  representatives and 6 appointed senators) NDP 10, MNU 2, SVLP 3
Judicial branch: 
  Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  New Democratic Party (NDP), James (Son) MITCHELL; Saint Vincent Labor
  Party (SVLP), Stanley JOHN; United People's Movement (UPM), Adrian
  SAUNDERS; Movement for National Unity (MNU), Ralph GONSALVES; National
  Reform Party (NRP), Joel MIGUEL
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU,
  LORCS, OAS, OECS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
  WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Kingsley C.A. LAYNE 
chancery: 
  1717 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 102, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-7806 or 7846 
FAX: 
  (202) 462-7807 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no official presence since the Ambassador resides in Bridgetown
  (Barbados)
Flag: 
  three vertical bands of blue (hoist side), gold (double width), and
  green; the gold band bears three green diamonds arranged in a V
  pattern

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture, dominated by banana production, is the most important
  sector of the economy. The services sector, based mostly on a growing
  tourist industry, is also important. The government has been
  relatively unsuccessful at introducing new industries, and high
  unemployment rates of 35%-40% continue.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $215 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6.5% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  35%-40% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $62 million 
expenditures: 
  $67 million, including capital expenditures of $21 million (1990 est.)
Exports: 
  $77.5 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  bananas, eddoes and dasheen (taro), arrowroot starch, tennis racquets
partners: 
  UK 54%, CARICOM 34%, US 10%
Imports: 
  $118.6 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, chemicals and fertilizers,
  minerals and fuels
partners: 
  US 36%, CARICOM 21%, UK 18%, Trinidad and Tobago 13%
External debt: 
  $62.6 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0% (1989); accounts for 8% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  16,600 kW
production: 
  64 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  555 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, cement, furniture, clothing, starch
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 15% of GDP and 60% of labor force; provides bulk of
  exports; products - bananas, coconuts, sweet potatoes, spices; small
  numbers of cattle, sheep, hogs, goats; small fish catch used locally
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for South American drugs destined for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-87), $11 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $81
  million 
Currency: 
  1 EC dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 - 2.70 (fixed rate since 1976)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,000 km 
paved: 
  300 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 400 km; unimproved earth 300 km 
Ports: 
  Kingstown
Merchant marine: 
  555 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,575,652 GRT/9,262,250 DWT,
  bulk 96, cargo 280, chemical tanker 13, combination bulk 12,
  combination ore/oil 2, container 31, liquefied gas 7, livestock
  carrier 1, multi-function large load carrier 1, oil tanker 56,
  passenger 2, passenger-cargo 5, refrigerated cargo 19,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 26, short-sea passenger 2, specialized tanker
  1, vehicle carrier 1 
note: 
  China owns 5 ships, Croatia owns 58, Russia owns 16; a flag of
  convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  6 
usable: 
  6 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  islandwide fully automatic telephone system; 6,500 telephones; VHF/UHF
  interisland links from Saint Vincent to the other islands of the
  Grenadines and Barbados; new SHF links to Grenada and Saint Lucia;
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, no FM, 1 TV (cable)

@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Police Force, Coast Guard 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@San Marino, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Europe, an enclave in central Italy
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  60 sq km 
land area: 
  60 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  total 39 km, Italy 39 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  Mediterranean; mild to cool winters; warm, sunny summers
Terrain: 
  rugged mountains
Natural resources: 
  building stone 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  17% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  83% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
international agreements: 
  NA 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  landlocked; smallest independent state in Europe after the Holy See
  and Monaco; dominated by the Apennines

@San Marino, People

Population: 
  24,091 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.96% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.17 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.39 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  5.77 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.6 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  81.23 years 
male: 
  77.17 years 
female: 
  85.28 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.53 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Sammarinese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Sammarinese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Sammarinese, Italian 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  Italian 
Literacy: 
  age 14 and over can read and write (1976)
total population: 
  96% 
male: 
  96% 
female: 
  95% 
Labor force: 
  4,300 (est.)
by occupation: 
  NA 

@San Marino, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of San Marino 
conventional short form: 
  San Marino 
local long form: 
  Repubblica di San Marino 
local short form: 
  San Marino 
Digraph: 
  SM
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  San Marino 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 municipalities (castelli, singular - castello); Acquaviva, Borgo
  Maggiore, Chiesanuova, Domagnano, Faetano, Fiorentino, Monte Giardino,
  San Marino, Serravalle
Independence: 
  301 AD (by tradition)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Foundation of the Republic, 3 September 
Constitution: 
  8 October 1600; electoral law of 1926 serves some of the functions of
  a constitution
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system with Italian law influences; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
co-chiefs of state: 
  Captain Regent Alberto CECCHETTI and Captain Regent Fausto MULARONI
  (for the period 1 April 1994-30 September 1994) real executive power
  is wielded by the secretary of state for foreign affairs and the
  secretary of state for internal affairs
head of government: 
  Secretary of State Gabriele GATTI (since July 1986) 
cabinet: 
  Congress of State;  elected by the Council for the duration of its
  term
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Great and General Council: 
  (Consiglio Grande e Generale) elections last held 30 May 1993 (next
  to be held by NA May 1998); results - DCS 41.4%, PSS 23.7%, PDP 18.6%,
  ADP 7.7%, MD 5.3%, RC 3.3%; seats - (60 total) DCS 26, PSS 14, PDP 11,
  ADP 4, MD 3, RC 2
Judicial branch: 
  Council of Twelve (Consiglio dei XII) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Christian Democratic Party (DCS), Pier Marino MENICUCCI, Luigi
  LONFERNINI; Democratic Progressive Party (PDP) formerly San Marino
  Communist Party (PSS), Stefano MACINA; San Marino Socialist Party
  (PSS), Dr. Emma ROSSI, Antonio Lazzaro VOLPINARI; Democratic Movement
  (MD), Emilio Della BALDA; Popular Democratic Alliance (ADP); Communist
  Refoundation (RC), Guiseppe AMICHI, Renato FABBRI
Member of: 
  CE, CSCE, ECE, ICAO, ICFTU, ILO, IMF, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, LORCS,
  NAM (guest), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
honorary consulate(s) general: 
  Washington and New York 
honorary consulate(s): 
  Detroit 
US diplomatic representation: 
  no mission in San Marino, but the Consul General in Florence (Italy)
  is accredited to San Marino
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and light blue with the
  national coat of arms superimposed in the center; the coat of arms has
  a shield (featuring three towers on three peaks) flanked by a wreath,
  below a crown and above a scroll bearing the word LIBERTAS (Liberty)

@San Marino, Economy

Overview: 
  The tourist sector contributes over 50% of GDP. In 1991 more than 3.1
  million tourists visited San Marino, 2.7 million of whom were
  Italians. The key industries are wearing apparel, electronics, and
  ceramics. Main agricultural products are wine and cheeses. The per
  capita level of output and standard of living are comparable to those
  of Italy.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $370 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $16,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  6.2% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  3% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $275 million 
expenditures: 
  $275 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992 est.)
Exports: 
  trade data are included with the statistics for Italy; commodity trade
  consists primarily of exchanging building stone, lime, wood,
  chestnuts, wheat, wine, baked goods, hides, and ceramics for a wide
  variety of consumer manufactures
Imports: 
  see exports
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for 42% of workforce
Electricity: 
  supplied by Italy
Industries: 
  wine, olive oil, cement, leather, textile, tourism
Agriculture: 
  employs 3% of labor force; products - wheat, grapes, maize, olives,
  meat, cheese, hides; small numbers of cattle, pigs, horses; depends on
  Italy for food imports
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 Italian lire (Lit) = 100 centesimi; note - also mints its own coins
Exchange rates: 
  Italian lire (Lit) per US$1 - 1,700.2 (January 1994), 1,573.7 (1993),
  1,232.4 (1992), 1,240.6 (1991), 1,198.1 (1990), 1,372.1 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@San Marino, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  104 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Telecommunications: 
  automatic telephone system completely integrated into Italian system;
  11,700 telephones; broadcast services from Italy; microwave and cable
  links into Italian networks; no communication satellite facilities

@San Marino, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  public security or police force 
Defense expenditures: 
  $3.7 million (1992 est.), 1% of GDP


@Sao Tome and Principe, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, in the Atlantic Ocean, 340 km off the coast of Gabon
  straddling the equator
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  960 sq km 
land area: 
  960 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 5.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  209 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; one rainy season (October to May)
Terrain: 
  volcanic, mountainous
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  20% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  75% 
other: 
  3% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion and exhaustion
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Sao Tome and Principe, People

Population: 
  136,780 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.63% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  35.2 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.88 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  63.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  63.33 years 
male: 
  61.48 years 
female: 
  65.24 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.52 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Sao Tomean(s) 
adjective: 
  Sao Tomean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestico, angolares (descendents of Angolan slaves), forros
  (descendents of freed slaves), servicais (contract laborers from
  Angola, Mozambique, and Cape Verde), tongas (children of servicais
  born on the islands), Europeans (primarily Portuguese)
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic, Evangelical Protestant, Seventh-Day Adventist 
Languages: 
  Portuguese (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1981)
total population: 
  57% 
male: 
  73% 
female: 
  42% 
Labor force: 
  21,096 (1981); most of population engaged in subsistence agriculture
  and fishing; labor shortages on plantations and of skilled workers;
  56% of population of working age (1983)

@Sao Tome and Principe, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe 
conventional short form: 
  Sao Tome and Principe 
local long form: 
  Republica Democratica de Sao Tome e Principe 
local short form: 
  Sao Tome e Principe 
Digraph: 
  TP
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Sao Tome 
Administrative divisions: 
  2 districts (concelhos, singular - concelho); Principe, Sao Tome
Independence: 
  12 July 1975 (from Portugal)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 12 July (1975) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution approved March 1990; effective 10 September 1990
Legal system: 
  based on Portuguese law system and customary law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Miguel TROVOADA (since 4 April 1991); election last held 3
  March 1991 (next to be held NA March 1996); results - Miguel TROVOADA
  was elected without opposition in Sao Tome's first multiparty
  presidential election
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Noberto Jose D'Alva COSTA ALEGRE (since 16 May 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on the proposal of
  the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National People's Assembly: 
  (Assembleia Popular Nacional) elections last held 20 January 1991
  (next to be held NA January 1996); results - PCD-GR 54.4%, MLSTP
  30.5%, CODO 5.2%, FDC 1.5%, other 8.4%; seats - (55 total) PCD-GR 33,
  MLSTP 21, CODO 1; note - this was the first multiparty election in Sao
  Tome and Principe
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Party for Democratic Convergence-Reflection Group (PCD-GR), Daniel
  Lima Dos Santos DAIO, secretary general; Movement for the Liberation
  of Sao Tome and Principe (MLSTP), Carlos da GRACA; Christian
  Democratic Front (FDC), Alphonse Dos SANTOS; Democratic Opposition
  Coalition (CODO), leader NA; other small parties
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOM (observer), ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Sao Tome and Principe has no embassy in the US, but does have a
  Permanent Mission to the UN, headed by First Secretary Domingos
  AUGUSTO Ferreira, located at 122 East 42nd Street, Suite 1604, New
  York, NY 10168, telephone (212) 697-4211
US diplomatic representation: 
  ambassador to Gabon is accredited to Sao Tome and Principe on a
  nonresident basis and makes periodic visits to the islands
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of green (top), yellow (double width), and
  green with two black five-pointed stars placed side by side in the
  center of the yellow band and a red isosceles triangle based on the
  hoist side; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

@Sao Tome and Principe, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy has remained dependent on cocoa since the country gained
  independence nearly 15 years ago. Since then, however, cocoa
  production has gradually deteriorated because of drought and
  mismanagement, so that by 1987 output had fallen to less than 50% of
  its former levels. As a result, a shortage of cocoa for export has
  created a serious balance-of-payments problem. Production of less
  important crops, such as coffee, copra, and palm kernels, has also
  declined. The value of imports generally exceeds that of exports by a
  ratio of 4:1. The emphasis on cocoa production at the expense of other
  food crops has meant that Sao Tome has to import 90% of food needs. It
  also has to import all fuels and most manufactured goods. Over the
  years, Sao Tome has been unable to service its external debt, which
  amounts to roughly 80% of export earnings. Considerable potential
  exists for development of a tourist industry, and the government has
  taken steps to expand facilities in recent years. The government also
  implemented a Five-Year Plan covering 1986-90 to restructure the
  economy and reschedule external debt service payments in cooperation
  with the International Development Association and Western lenders.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $50 million (1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.5% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $450 (1990)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  27% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $10.2 million 
expenditures: 
  $36.8 million, including capital expenditures of $22.5 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $5.4 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  cocoa 78%, copra, coffee, palm oil
partners: 
  Netherlands, Germany, China, Portugal
Imports: 
  $31.5 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and electrical equipment 44%, food products 18%, petroleum
  11%
partners: 
  Portugal, Japan, Spain, France, Angola
External debt: 
  $163.6 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1% (1991); accounts for 7% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  5,000 kW
production: 
  10 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  80 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  light construction, shirts, soap, beer, fisheries, shrimp processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 25% of GDP; dominant sector of economy, primary source of
  exports; cash crops - cocoa (85%), coconuts, palm kernels, coffee;
  food products - bananas, papaya, beans, poultry, fish; not
  self-sufficient in food grain and meat
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $8 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $89
  million 
Currency: 
  1 dobra (Db) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates: 
  dobras (Db) per US$1 - 129.59 (1 July 1993), 230 (1992), 260.0
  (November 1991), 122.48 (December 1988), 72.827 (1987), 36.993 (1986)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Sao Tome and Principe, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  300 km 
paved: 
  200 km 
unpaved: 
  100 km 
note: 
  roads on Principe are mostly unpaved and in need of repair
Ports: 
  Sao Tome, Santo Antonio
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,096 GRT/1,105 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  minimal system; broadcast stations - 1 AM, 2 FM, no TV; 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Sao Tome and Principe, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 32,560; fit for military service 17,136 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Saudi Arabia, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, between the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,960,582 sq km 
land area: 
  1,960,582 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than one-fourth the size of the US
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,415 km, Iraq 814 km, Jordan 728 km, Kuwait 222 km, Oman 676
  km, Qatar 60 km, UAE 457 km, Yemen 1,458 km 
Coastline: 
  2,640 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  18 nm
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  large section of boundary with Yemen not defined; status of boundary
  with UAE not final; Kuwaiti ownership of Qaruh and Umm al Maradim
  islands is disputed by Saudi Arabia
Climate: 
  harsh, dry desert with great extremes of temperature
Terrain: 
  mostly uninhabited, sandy desert
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold, copper 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  39% 
forest and woodland: 
  1% 
other: 
  59% 
Irrigated land: 
  4,350 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  desertification; depletion of underground water resources; the lack of
  perennial rivers or permanent water bodies has prompted the
  development of extensive seawater desalination facilities; coastal
  pollution from oil spills
natural hazards: 
  frequent sand and dust storms
international agreements: 
  party to - Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not
  ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  extensive coastlines on Persian Gulf and Red Sea provide great
  leverage on shipping (especially crude oil) through Persian Gulf and
  Suez Canal

@Saudi Arabia, People

Population: 
  18,196,783 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  the population figure is consistent with a 3.24% growth rate; a 1992
  census gives the number of Saudi citizens as 12,304,835 and the number
  of residents who are not citizens as 4,624,459
Population growth rate: 
  3.24% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  38.25 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.83 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  52.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.91 years 
male: 
  66.25 years 
female: 
  69.65 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.67 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Saudi(s) 
adjective: 
  Saudi or Saudi Arabian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab 90%, Afro-Asian 10% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 100% 
Languages: 
  Arabic 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  62% 
male: 
  73% 
female: 
  48% 
Labor force: 
  5 million-6 million
by occupation: 
  government 34%, industry and oil 28%, services 22%, agriculture 16%

@Saudi Arabia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
conventional short form: 
  Saudi Arabia 
local long form: 
  Al Mamlakah al Arabiyah as Suudiyah 
local short form: 
  Al Arabiyah as Suudiyah 
Digraph: 
  SA
Type: 
  monarchy 
Capital: 
  Riyadh 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 emirates (imarat, singular - imarah); Al Bahah, Al Hudud ash
  Shamaliyah, Al Jawf, Al Madinah, Al Qasim, Al Qurayyat, Ar Riyad, Ash
  Sharqiyah, Asir, Hail, Jizan, Makkah, Najran, Tabuk
Independence: 
  23 September 1932 (unification)
National holiday: 
  Unification of the Kingdom, 23 September (1932) 
Constitution: 
  none; governed according to Shari'a (Islamic law)
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law, several secular codes have been introduced;
  commercial disputes handled by special committees; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (since 13 June
  1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime Minister ABDALLAH bin Abd
  al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the King, appointed heir to the
  throne 13 June 1982) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; mostly made up of the royal family appointed by
  the king
Legislative branch: 
  a consultative council comprised of 60 members and a chairman who are
  appointed by the King for a term of four years
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Council of Justice 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none allowed
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-19, G-77, GCC, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OAS (observer),
  OIC, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador BANDAR bin Sultan Abd al-Aziz Al Saud 
chancery: 
  601 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037 
telephone: 
  (202) 342-3800 
consulate(s) general: 
  Houston, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires C. David Welch 
embassy: 
  Collector Road M, Diplomatic Quarter, Riyadh 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy, Unit 61307, Riyadh; International Mail: P. O. Box
  94309, Riyadh 11693; or APO AE 09803-1307 
telephone: 
  [966] (1) 488-3800 
FAX: 
  [966] (1) 482-4364 
consulate(s) general: 
  Dhahran, Jiddah (Jeddah) 
Flag: 
  green with large white Arabic script (that may be translated as There
  is no God but God; Muhammad is the Messenger of God) above a white
  horizontal saber (the tip points to the hoist side); green is the
  traditional color of Islam

@Saudi Arabia, Economy

Overview: 
  The petroleum sector accounts for roughly 75% of budget revenues, 35%
  of GDP, and almost all export earnings. Saudi Arabia has the largest
  reserves of petroleum in the world, ranks as the largest exporter of
  petroleum, and plays a leading role in OPEC. For the 1990s the
  government intends to bring its budget, which has been in deficit
  since 1983, back into balance, and to encourage private economic
  activity. Roughly four million foreign workers play an important role
  in the Saudi economy, for example, in the oil and banking sectors. For
  about a decade, Saudi Arabia's domestic and international outlays have
  outstripped its income, and the government has cut its foreign
  assistance and is beginning to rein in domestic programs.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $194 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $11,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  1% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  6.5% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $39 billion 
expenditures: 
  $50 billion, including capital expenditures of $7.5 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $42.3 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum and petroleum products 92%
partners: 
  US 21%, Japan 18%, Singapore 6%, France 6%, Korea 5%
Imports: 
  $26 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, foodstuffs, motor vehicles,
  textiles
partners: 
  US 18%, UK 12%, Japan 10%, Germany 5%, France 5%
External debt: 
  $18.9 billion (December 1989 est., includes short-term trade credits)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 20% (1991 est.); accounts for 46% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  28,554,000 kW
production: 
  63 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,690 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  crude oil production, petroleum refining, basic petrochemicals,
  cement, two small steel-rolling mills, construction, fertilizer,
  plastics
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 10% of GDP, 16% of labor force; subsidized by
  government; products - wheat, barley, tomatoes, melons, dates, citrus
  fruit, mutton, chickens, eggs, milk; approaching self-sufficiency in
  food
Illicit drugs: 
  death penalty for traffickers; increasing consumption of heroin and
  cocaine
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  pledged bilateral aid (1979-89), $64.7 billion; pledged $100 million
  in 1993 to fund reconstruction of Lebanon
Currency: 
  1 Saudi riyal (SR) = 100 halalah
Exchange rates: 
  Saudi riyals (SR) per US$1 - 3.7450 (fixed rate since late 1986),
  3.7033 (1986)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Saudi Arabia, Communications

Railroads: 
  1390 km 1.435-meter standard gauge; 448 km are double tracked
Highways: 
total: 
  74,000 km 
paved: 
  35,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 39,000 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 6,400 km; petroleum products 150 km; natural gas 2,200 km
  (includes natural gas liquids 1,600 km)
Ports: 
  Jiddah, Ad Dammam, Ras Tanura, Jizan, Al Jubayl, Yanbu' al Bahr,
  Yanbu' al Sinaiyah
Merchant marine: 
  74 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 865,343 GRT/1,240,874 DWT, bulk
  1, cargo 11, chemical tanker 4, container 3, liquefied gas 1,
  livestock carrier 5, oil tanker 23, passenger 1, refrigerated cargo 6,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 11, short-sea passenger 7, specialized tanker 1
Airports: 
total: 
  215 
usable: 
  195 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  71 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  14 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  38 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  105 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system with extensive microwave and coaxial and fiber optic
  cable systems; 1,624,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 43 AM, 13
  FM, 80 TV; microwave radio relay to Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar,
  UAE, Yemen, and Sudan; coaxial cable to Kuwait and Jordan; submarine
  cable to Djibouti, Egypt and Bahrain; earth stations - 3 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT, 2 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 ARABSAT, 1 INMARSAT

@Saudi Arabia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Land Force (Army), Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force, National Guard,
  Coast Guard, Frontier Forces, Special Security Force, Public Security
  Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 5,682,036; fit for military service 3,140,464; reach
  military age (17) annually 147,420 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $16.5 billion, 13% of GDP (1993 budget)


@Senegal, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between
  Guinea-Bissau and Mauritania
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  196,190 sq km 
land area: 
  192,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than South Dakota
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,640 km, The Gambia 740 km, Guinea 330 km, Guinea-Bissau 338
  km, Mali 419 km, Mauritania 813 km 
Coastline: 
  531 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of the boundary with The Gambia is indefinite; Senegal
  and Guinea-Bissau signed an agreement resolving their maritime
  boundary in 1993; boundary with Mauritania
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; rainy season (December to April) has strong
  southeast winds; dry season (May to November) dominated by hot, dry
  harmattan wind
Terrain: 
  generally low, rolling, plains rising to foothills in southeast
Natural resources: 
  fish, phosphates, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  27% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  30% 
forest and woodland: 
  31% 
other: 
  12% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,800 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  wildlife populations threatened by poaching; deforestation;
  overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  lowlands seasonally flooded; periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Marine Dumping
Note: 
  The Gambia is almost an enclave

@Senegal, People

Population: 
  8,730,508 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.11% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.15 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.01 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  75.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  56.58 years 
male: 
  55.12 years 
female: 
  58.09 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.09 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Senegalese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Senegalese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Wolof 36%, Fulani 17%, Serer 17%, Toucouleur 9%, Diola 9%, Mandingo
  9%, European and Lebanese 1%, other 2% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 92%, indigenous beliefs 6%, Christian 2% (mostly Roman
  Catholic)
Languages: 
  French (official), Wolof, Pulaar, Diola, Mandingo 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  38% 
male: 
  52% 
female: 
  25% 
Labor force: 
  2.509 million (77% are engaged in subsistence farming; 175,000 wage
  earners)
by occupation: 
  private sector 40%, government and parapublic 60%
note: 
  52% of population of working age (1985)

@Senegal, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Senegal 
conventional short form: 
  Senegal 
local long form: 
  Republique du Senegal 
local short form: 
  Senegal 
Digraph: 
  SG
Type: 
  republic under multiparty democratic rule
Capital: 
  Dakar 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 regions (regions, singular - region); Dakar, Diourbel, Fatick,
  Kaolack, Kolda, Louga, Saint-Louis, Tambacounda, Thies, Ziguinchor
Independence: 
  20 August 1960 (from France; The Gambia and Senegal signed an
  agreement on 12 December 1981 that called for the creation of a loose
  confederation to be known as Senegambia, but the agreement was
  dissolved on 30 September 1989)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 4 April (1960) 
Constitution: 
  3 March 1963, last revised in 1991
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts
  in Supreme Court, which also audits the government's accounting
  office; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Abdou DIOUF (since 1 January 1981); election last held 21
  February 1993 (next to be held February 2000); results - Abdou DIOUF
  (PS) 58.4%, Abdoulaye WADE (PDS) 32.03%, other 9.57%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Habib THIAM (since 7 April 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister in consultation
  with the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 9 May 1993 (next to be held NA May 1998); results
  - PS 70%, PDS 23%, other 7%; seats - (120 total) PS 84, PDS 27, LD-MPT
  3, Let Us Unite Senegal 3, PIT 2, UDS-R 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Socialist Party (PS), President Abdou DIOUF; Senegalese Democratic
  Party (PDS), Abdoulaye WADE; Democratic League-Labor Party Movement
  (LD-MPT), Dr. Abdoulaye BATHILY; Independent Labor Party (PIT), Amath
  DANSOKHO; Senegalese Democratic Union-Renewal (UDS-R), Mamadou
  Puritain FALL; other small uninfluential parties
Other political or pressure groups: 
  students; teachers; labor; Muslim Brotherhoods
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-15, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC,
  PCA, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOMUR, UNTAC, UPU,
  WADB, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mamadou Mansour SECK 
chancery: 
  2112 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-0540 or 0541 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mark JOHNSON 
embassy: 
  Avenue Jean XXIII at the corner of Avenue Kleber, Dakar 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 49, Dakar 
telephone: 
  [221] 23-42-96 or 23-34-24 
FAX: 
  [221] 22-29-91 
Flag: 
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), yellow, and red with
  a small green five-pointed star centered in the yellow band; uses the
  popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

@Senegal, Economy

Overview: 
  After 14 years of mixed compliance with IMF and World Bank economic
  reform programs, Senegal finds its economy remains hostage to negative
  economic forces. Declining terms of trade, weather-related setbacks,
  and relentless growth in population have held back overall growth and
  left per capita incomes stagnant, if not diminished. The economy
  continues to rely on exports of fish, peanuts, and phosphates for hard
  currency earnings. A 50% devaluation of the African franc in January
  1994 is likely to lead to substantial increases in local currency
  prices for producers that may spur improved production. A sheltered
  import-substitution sector, comprising textiles, shoes, and other
  light manufacturing, will remain plagued, however, by high labor,
  transportation, and energy costs. Public finances face a decade-long
  trend in declining tax revenues, making the government increasingly
  dependent on official development assistance from bilateral donors.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $11.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.2% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,400 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  -1.8% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.2 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $269 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $904 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  fish, ground nuts, petroleum products, phosphates, cotton
partners: 
  France, other EC members, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (c.i.f., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  foods and beverages, consumer goods, capital goods, petroleum
partners: 
  France, other EC, Nigeria, Cote d'Ivoire, Algeria, China, Japan
External debt: 
  $2.9 billion (1990)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.9% (1991); accounts for 15% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  215,000 kW
production: 
  760 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  100 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  agricultural and fish processing, phosphate mining, petroleum
  refining, building materials
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 20% of GDP; major products - peanuts (cash crop), millet,
  corn, sorghum, rice, cotton, tomatoes, green vegetables; estimated
  two-thirds self-sufficient in food; fish catch of 354,000 metric tons
  in 1990
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin moving to Europe and
  North America
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $551 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $5.23
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $589 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $295 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  the official rate is pegged to the French franc, and beginning 12
  January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per French franc
  from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Senegal, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,034 km 1.000-meter gauge; all single track except 70 km double track
  Dakar to Thies
Highways: 
total: 
  14,007 km 
paved: 
  3,777 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, improved earth 10,230 km 
Inland waterways: 
  897 km total; 785 km on the Senegal, 112 km on the Saloum
Ports: 
  Dakar, Kaolack, Foundiougne, Ziguinchor
Merchant marine: 
  1 bulk ship (1,000 GRT and over) totaling 1,995 GRT/3,775 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  26 
usable: 
  20 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  16 
Telecommunications: 
  above-average urban system, using microwave and cable; broadcast
  stations - 8 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 3 submarine cables; 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT earth station

@Senegal, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Gendarmerie, National Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,951,370; fit for military service 1,018,802; reach
  military age (18) annually 94,973 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $100 million, 2% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Serbia and Montenegro

Header
Note: 
  Serbia and Montenegro have asserted the formation of a joint
  independent state, but this entity has not been formally recognized as
  a state by the US; the US view is that the Socialist Federal Republic
  of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has dissolved and that none of the successor
  republics represents its continuation

@Serbia and Montenegro, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea, between
  Bosnia and Herzegovina and Bulgaria
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  102,350 sq km 
land area: 
  102,136 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Kentucky
note: 
  Serbia has a total area and a land area of 88,412 sq km making it
  slightly larger than Maine; Montenegro has a total area of 13,938 sq
  km and a land area of 13,724 sq km making it slightly larger than
  Connecticut
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,246 km, Albania 287 km (114 km with Serbia; 173 km with
  Motenegro), Bosnia and Herzegovina 527 km (312 km with Serbia; 215 km
  with Montenegro), Bulgaria 318 km, Croatia (north) 241 km, Croatia
  (south) 25 km, Hungary 151 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia 221 km, Romania 476 km 
note: 
  the internal boundary between Montenegro and Serbia is 211 km
Coastline: 
  199 km (Montenegro 199 km, Serbia 0 km)
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Sandzak region bordering northern Montenegro and southeastern Serbia -
  Muslims seeking autonomy; disputes with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
  Croatia over Serbian populated areas; Albanian majority in Kosovo
  seeks independence from Serbian Republic
Climate: 
  in the north, continental climate (cold winter and hot, humid summers
  with well distributed rainfall); central portion, continental and
  Mediterranean climate; to the south, Adriatic climate along the coast,
  hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively cold winters with heavy
  snowfall inland
Terrain: 
  extremely varied; to the north, rich fertile plains; to the east,
  limestone ranges and basins; to the southeast, ancient mountain and
  hills; to the southwest, extremely high shoreline with no islands off
  the coast; home of largest lake in former Yugoslavia, Lake Scutari
Natural resources: 
  oil, gas, coal, antimony, copper, lead, zinc, nickel, gold, pyrite,
  chrome 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  30% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  25% 
other: 
  20% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  coastal water pollution from sewage outlets, especially in
  tourist-related areas such as Kotor; air pollution around Belgrade and
  other industrial cities; water pollution from industrial wastes dumped
  into the Sava which flows into the Danube
natural hazards: 
  subject to destructive earthquakes
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  controls one of the major land routes from Western Europe to Turkey
  and the Near East; strategic location along the Adriatic coast

@Serbia and Montenegro, People

Population: 
total: 
  10,759,897 (July 1994 est.) 
Montenegro: 
  666,583 (July 1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  10,093,314 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
Montenegro: 
  0.79% (1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  0.54% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
Montenegro: 
  13.72 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  14.35 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
Montenegro: 
  5.84 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  8.94 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
Montenegro: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
Montenegro: 
  10.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  21.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
Montenegro: 
  *** No data for this item ***
total population: 
  79.44 years 
male: 
  76.57 years 
female: 
  82.5 years (1994 est.)
Serbia: 
  *** No data for this item ***
total population: 
  73.39 years 
male: 
  70.9 years 
female: 
  76.07 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
Montenegro: 
  1.74 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Serbia: 
  2.06 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Serb(s) and Montenegrin(s) 
adjective: 
  Serbian and Montenegrin 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Serbs 63%, Albanians 14%, Montenegrins 6%, Hungarians 4%, other 13% 
Religions: 
  Orthodox 65%, Muslim 19%, Roman Catholic 4%, Protestant 1%, other 11% 
Languages: 
  Serbo-Croatian 95%, Albanian 5% 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  2,640,909 
by occupation: 
  industry, mining 40%, agriculture 5% (1990)

@Serbia and Montenegro, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Serbia and Montenegro 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Srbija-Crna Gora 
Digraph: 
Serbia: 
  SR
Montenegro: 
  MW
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Belgrade 
Administrative divisions: 
  2 republics (pokajine, singular - pokajina); and 2 autonomous
  provinces*; Kosovo*, Montenegro, Serbia, Vojvodina*
Independence: 
  11 April 1992 (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia formed as
  self-proclaimed successor to the Socialist Federal Republic of
  Yugoslavia - SFRY)
National holiday: 
  NA
Constitution: 
  27 April 1992
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  16 years of age, if employed;  18 years of age, universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Zoran LILIC (since 25 June 1993); note - Slobodan MILOSEVIC is
  president of Serbia (since 9 December 1990); Momir BULATOVIC is
  president of Montenegro (since 23 December 1990); Federal Assembly
  elected Zoran LILIC on 25 June 1993
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Radoje KONTIC (since 29 December 1992); Deputy Prime
  Ministers Jovan ZEBIC (since NA March 1993), Asim TELACEVIC (since NA
  March 1993), Zeljko SIMIC (since NA 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Federal Executive Council 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Federal Assembly
Chamber of Republics: 
  elections last held 31 May 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (40 total; 20 Serbian, 20
  Montenegrin)
Chamber of Citizens: 
  elections last held 31 May 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results -
  percent of votes by party NA; seats (138 total; 108 Serbian, 30
  Montenegrin) - SPS 73, SRS 33, DPSCG 23, SK-PJ 2, DZVM 2, independents
  2, vacant 3
Judicial branch: 
  Savezni Sud (Federal Court), Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Serbian Socialist Party (SPS; former Communist Party), Slobodan
  MILOSEVIC; Serbian Radical Party (SRS), Vojislav SESELJ; Serbian
  Renewal Movement (SPO), Vuk DRASKOVIC, president; Democratic Party
  (DS), Zoran DJINDJIC; Democratic Party of Serbia, Vojlslav KOSTUNICA;
  Democratic Party of Socialists (DPSCG), Momir BULATOVIC, president;
  People's Party of Montenegro (NS), Novak KILIBARDA; Liberal Alliance
  of Montenegro, Slavko PEROVIC; Democratic Community of Vojvodina
  Hungarians (DZVM), Agoston ANDRAS; League of Communists-Movement for
  Yugoslavia (SK-PJ), Dragan ATANASOVSKI; Democratic Alliance of Kosovo
  (LDK), Dr. Ibrahim RUGOVA, president
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Serbian Democratic Movement (DEPOS; coalition of opposition parties)
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  US and Serbia and Montenegro do not maintain full diplomatic
  relations; the Embassy of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
  Yugoslavia continues to function in the US
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Rudolf V. PERINA 
embassy: 
  address NA, Belgrade 
mailing address: 
  American Embassy Box 5070, Unit 25402, APO AE 09213-5070 
telephone: 
  [38] (11) 645-655 
FAX: 
  [38] (1) 645-221 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and red

@Serbia and Montenegro, Economy

Overview: 
  The swift collapse of the Yugoslav federation has been followed by
  bloody ethnic warfare, the destabilization of republic boundaries, and
  the breakup of important interrepublic trade flows. Serbia and
  Montenegro faces major economic problems; output has dropped sharply,
  particularly in 1993. First, like the other former Yugoslav republics,
  it depended on its sister republics for large amounts of foodstuffs,
  energy supplies, and manufactures. Wide varieties in climate, mineral
  resources, and levels of technology among the republics accentuate
  this interdependence, as did the communist practice of concentrating
  much industrial output in a small number of giant plants. The breakup
  of many of the trade links, the sharp drop in output as industrial
  plants lost suppliers and markets, and the destruction of physical
  assets in the fighting all have contributed to the economic
  difficulties of the republics. One singular factor in the economic
  situation of Serbia and Montenegro is the continuation in office of a
  communist government that is primarily interested in political and
  military mastery, not economic reform. A further complication is the
  imposition of economic sanctions by the UN.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $10 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  hyperinflation (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  more than 60% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $4.4 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 29%, manufactured goods 28.5%,
  miscellaneous manufactured articles 13.5%, chemicals 11%, food and
  live animals 9%, raw materials 6%, fuels and lubricants 2%, beverages
  and tobacco 1%
partners: 
  prior to the imposition of sanctions by the UN Security Council trade
  partners were principally the other former Yugoslav republics; Italy,
  Germany, other EC, the FSU countries, East European countries, US
Imports: 
  $6.4 billion (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 26%, fuels and lubricants 18%,
  manufactured goods 16%, chemicals 12.5%, food and live animals 11%,
  miscellaneous manufactured items 8%, raw materials, including coking
  coal for the steel industry 7%, beverages, tobacco, and edible oils
  1.5%
partners: 
  prior to the imposition of sanctions by the UN Security Council the
  trade partners were principally the other former Yugoslav republics;
  the FSU countries, EC countries (mainly Italy and Germany), East
  European countries, US
External debt: 
  $4.2 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -42% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  8,850,000 kW
production: 
  42 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,950 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  machine building (aircraft, trucks, and automobiles; armored vehicles
  and weapons; electrical equipment; agricultural machinery), metallurgy
  (steel, aluminum, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, antimony, bismuth,
  cadmium), mining (coal, bauxite, nonferrous ore, iron ore, limestone),
  consumer goods (textiles, footwear, foodstuffs, appliances),
  electronics, petroleum products, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals
Agriculture: 
  the fertile plains of Vojvodina produce 80% of the cereal production
  of the former Yugoslavia and most of the cotton, oilseeds, and
  chicory; Vojvodina also produces fodder crops to support intensive
  beef and dairy production; Serbia proper, although hilly, has a
  well-distributed rainfall and a long growing season; produces fruit,
  grapes, and cereals; in this area, livestock production (sheep and
  cattle) and dairy farming prosper; Kosovo produces fruits, vegetables,
  tobacco, and a small amount of cereals; the mountainous pastures of
  Kosovo and Montenegro support sheep and goat husbandry; Montenegro has
  only a small agriculture sector, mostly near the coast where a
  Mediterranean climate permits the culture of olives, citrus, grapes,
  and rice
Illicit drugs: 
  NA
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 Yugoslav New Dinar (YD) = 100 paras
Exchange rates: 
  Yugoslav New Dinars (YD) per US $1 - 1,100,000 (15 June 1993), 28.230
  (December 1991), 15.162 (1990), 15.528 (1989), 0.701 (1988), 0.176
  (1987)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Serbia and Montenegro, Communications

Railroads: 
  NA
Highways: 
total: 
  46,019 km 
paved: 
  26,949 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 10,373 km; earth 8,697 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  NA km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 415 km; petroleum products 130 km; natural gas 2,110 km 
Ports: 
  coastal - Bar; inland - Belgrade
Merchant marine: 
  bulk 19, bulk 2, cargo 16, combination ore/oil 1, conbination
  tanker/ore carrier 1, container 5, passenger ship 1 
Montenegro: 
  total 42 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 804,156 GRT/1,368,813 DWT
  (controlled by Montenegrin beneficial owners)
Serbia: 
  total 3 (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 246,631 GRT/451,843 DWT
  (controlled by Serbian beneficial owners)
note: 
  most under Maltese flag, all under the flag of Saint Vincent and the
  Grenadines; no ships remain under Yugoslav flag
Airports: 
total: 
  55 
usable: 
  51 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  18 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  11 
Telecommunications: 
  700,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 26 AM, 9 FM, 18 TV; 2,015,000
  radios; 1,000,000 TVs; satellite ground stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT

@Serbia and Montenegro, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  People's Army - Ground Forces (internal and border troops), Naval
  Forces, Air and Air Defense Forces, Frontier Guard, Territorial
  Defense Force, Civil Defense 
Manpower availability: 
Montenegro: 
  males age 15-49 179,868; fit for military service 146,158; reach
  military age (19) annually 5,399 (1994 est.)
Serbia: 
  males age 15-49 2,546,717; fit for military service 2,048,921; reach
  military age (19) annually 80,937 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  245 billion dinars, 4%-6% of GDP (1992 est.); note - conversion of
  defense expenditures into US dollars using the prevailing exchange
  rate could produce misleading results


@Seychelles, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa in the western Indian Ocean northeast of Madagascar
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  455 sq km 
land area: 
  455 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  491 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims Tromelin Island
Climate: 
  tropical marine; humid; cooler season during southeast monsoon (late
  May to September); warmer season during northwest monsoon (March to
  May)
Terrain: 
  Mahe Group is granitic, narrow coastal strip, rocky, hilly; others are
  coral, flat, elevated reefs
Natural resources: 
  fish, copra, cinnamon trees 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  18% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  18% 
other: 
  60% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  no fresh water, catchments collect rain water
natural hazards: 
  lies outside the cyclone belt, so severe storms are rare; short
  droughts possible
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
Note: 
  40 granitic and about 50 coralline islands

@Seychelles, People

Population: 
  72,113 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.84% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  21.88 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.93 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  11.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.67 years 
male: 
  66.05 years 
female: 
  73.39 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.23 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Seychellois (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Seychelles 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Seychellois (mixture of Asians, Africans, Europeans)
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 90%, Anglican 8%, other 2% 
Languages: 
  English (official), French (official), Creole 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1971)
total population: 
  58% 
male: 
  56% 
female: 
  60% 
Labor force: 
  27,700 (1985)
by occupation: 
  industry and commerce 31%, services 21%, government 20%, agriculture,
  forestry, and fishing 12%, other 16% (1985)
note: 
  57% of population of working age (1983)

@Seychelles, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Seychelles 
conventional short form: 
  Seychelles 
Digraph: 
  SE
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Victoria 
Administrative divisions: 
  23 administrative districts; Anse aux Pins, Anse Boileau, Anse Etoile,
  Anse Louis, Anse Royale, Baie Lazare, Baie Sainte Anne, Beau Vallon,
  Bel Air, Bel Ombre, Cascade, Glacis, Grand' Anse (on Mahe Island),
  Grand' Anse (on Praslin Island), La Digue, La Riviere Anglaise, Mont
  Buxton, Mont Fleuri, Plaisance, Pointe Larue, Port Glaud, Saint Louis,
  Takamaka
Independence: 
  29 June 1976 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 18 June (1993) ( adoption of new constitution)
Constitution: 
  18 June 1993  
Legal system: 
  based on English common law, French civil law, and customary law
Suffrage: 
  17 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President France Albert RENE (since 5 June 1977); election last held
  20- 23 July 1993; results - President France Albert RENE reelected by
  59.5% of votes, MANCHAM (PS party) 36.72%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
People's Assembly (Assemblee du Peuple): 
  elections last held 20-23 July 1993; results - SPPF 82%, DP 15%, UO
  3%; seats - (33 total, 22 elected) SPPF 22
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  ruling party - Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), France
  Albert RENE; Democratic Party (DP), Sir James MANCHAM; United
  Opposition (UO) is a coalition of the following parties: Seychelles
  Party (PS), Wavel RAMKALAWAN; Seychelles Democratic Movement (MSPD),
  Jacques HONDOUL; Seychelles Liberal Party (SLP), Ogilvie BERLOUIS;; 
Other political or pressure groups: 
  trade unions; Roman Catholic Church
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, C, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD, IFC, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ISO
  (correspondent), NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
  WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Marc Michael Rogers MARENGO 
chancery: 
  (temporary) 820 Second Avenue, Suite 900F, New York, NY 10017 
telephone: 
  (212) 687-9766 or 9767 
FAX: 
  (212) 922-9177 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Matthew F. MATTINGLY 
embassy: 
  4th Floor, Victoria House, Box 251, Victoria, Mahe 
mailing address: 
  Box 148, Unit 62501, Victoria, Seychelles; APO AE 09815-2501 
telephone: 
  (248) 25256 
FAX: 
  (248) 25189 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of red (top), white (wavy), and green; the
  white band is the thinnest, the red band is the thickest

@Seychelles, Economy

Overview: 
  In this small, open, tropical island economy, the tourist industry
  employs about 30% of the labor force and provides more than 70% of
  hard currency earnings. In recent years the government has encouraged
  foreign investment in order to upgrade hotels and other services. At
  the same time, the government has moved to reduce the high dependence
  on tourism by promoting the development of farming, fishing, and
  small-scale manufacturing.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $407 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,900 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.3% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  9% (1987)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $172 million 
expenditures: 
  $181 million, including capital expenditures of $48 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $47 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  fish, copra, cinnamon bark, petroleum products (re-exports)
partners: 
  UK 54% France 23%, Reunion 14%, (1991)
Imports: 
  $192 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, food, petroleum products, tobacco, beverages,
  machinery and transportation equipment
partners: 
  South Africa 13%, Singapore 12%, UK 12% (1991)
External debt: 
  $201 million (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.3% (1991); accounts for 12% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  30,000 kW
production: 
  80 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,160 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  tourism, processing of coconut and vanilla, fishing, coir rope
  factory, boat building, printing, furniture, beverage
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 5% of GDP, mostly subsistence farming; cash crops -
  coconuts, cinnamon, vanilla; other products - sweet potatoes, cassava,
  bananas; broiler chickens; large share of food needs imported;
  expansion of tuna fishing under way
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY78-89), $26 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1978-89), $315
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $5 million; Communist countries
  (1970-89), $60 million 
Currency: 
  1 Seychelles rupee (SRe) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Seychelles rupees (SRe) per US$1 - 5.2681 (January 1994), 5.1815
  (1993), 5.1220 (1992), 5.2893 (1991), 5.3369 (1990), 5.6457 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Seychelles, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  260 km 
paved: 
  160 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, earth 100 km 
Ports: 
  Victoria
Merchant marine: 
  1 refrigerated cargo (over 1,000 GRT) totaling 1,827 GRT/2,170 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  14 
usable: 
  14 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  8 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  direct radio communications with adjacent islands and African coastal
  countries; 13,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 2 AM, no FM, 2 TV;
  1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth station; USAF tracking station

@Seychelles, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, National Guard, Marines, Coast Guard, Presidential Protection
  Unit, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 19,399; fit for military service 9,900 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $12 million, 4% of GDP (1990 est.)


@Sierra Leone, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between Guinea and
  Liberia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  71,740 sq km 
land area: 
  71,620 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than South Carolina
Land boundaries: 
  total 958 km, Guinea 652 km, Liberia 306 km 
Coastline: 
  402 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; summer rainy season (May to December); winter
  dry season (December to April)
Terrain: 
  coastal belt of mangrove swamps, wooded hill country, upland plateau,
  mountains in east
Natural resources: 
  diamonds, titanium ore, bauxite, iron ore, gold, chromite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  25% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  31% 
forest and woodland: 
  29% 
other: 
  13% 
Irrigated land: 
  340 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  rapid population growth pressuring the environment; overharvesting of
  timber, expansion of cattle grazing, and slash-and-burn agriculture
  have resulted in deforestation and soil exhaustion; civil war
  depleting natural resources
natural hazards: 
  dry, sand-laden harmattan winds blow from the Sahara (November to May)
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not
  ratified - Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea

@Sierra Leone, People

Population: 
  4,630,037 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.62% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.06 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.87 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  141.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  46.4 years 
male: 
  43.58 years 
female: 
  49.3 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.96 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Sierra Leonean(s) 
adjective: 
  Sierra Leonean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  13 native African tribes 99% (Temne 30%, Mende 30%, other 39%),
  Creole, European, Lebanese, and Asian 1% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 60%, indigenous beliefs 30%, Christian 10% 
Languages: 
  English (official; regular use limited to literate minority), Mende
  principal vernacular in the south, Temne principal vernacular in the
  north, Krio the language of the re-settled ex-slave population of the
  Freetown area and is lingua franca
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write English, Merde, Temne, or Arabic
  (1990 est.)
total population: 
  21% 
male: 
  31% 
female: 
  11% 
Labor force: 
  1.369 million (1981 est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 65%, industry 19%, services 16% (1981 est.)
note: 
  only about 65,000 wage earners (1985); 55% of population of working
  age

@Sierra Leone, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Sierra Leone 
conventional short form: 
  Sierra Leone 
Digraph: 
  SL
Type: 
  military government 
Capital: 
  Freetown 
Administrative divisions: 
  3 provinces and 1 area*; Eastern, Northern, Southern, Western*
Independence: 
  27 April 1961 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Republic Day, 27 April (1961) 
Constitution: 
  1 October 1991; suspended following 19 April 1992 coup
Legal system: 
  based on English law and customary laws indigenous to local tribes;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Chairman of the Supreme Council of State Capt. Valentine E. M.
  STRASSER (since 29 April 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Secretaries; responsible to the NPRC
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral House of Representatives (suspended after coup of 29 April
  1992); Chairman STRASSER promises multi-party elections sometime in
  1995
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (suspended after coup of 29 April 1992)
Political parties and leaders: 
  status of existing political parties is unknown following 29 April
  1992 coup
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory
  user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UNOMIG, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Thomas Kahota KARGBO 
chancery: 
  1701 19th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-9261 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Lauralee M. PETERS 
embassy: 
  Walpole and Siaka Stevens Street, Freetown 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [232] (22) 226-481 
FAX: 
  [232] (22) 225-471 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of light green (top), white, and light
  blue

@Sierra Leone, Economy

Overview: 
  The economic and social infrastructure is not well developed.
  Subsistence agriculture dominates the economy, generating about
  one-third of GDP and employing about two-thirds of the working
  population. Manufacturing, which accounts for roughly 10% of GDP,
  consists mainly of the processing of raw materials and of light
  manufacturing for the domestic market. Diamond mining provides an
  important source of hard currency. In 1990-93, the government, with
  the support of the IMF and the World Bank, has made substantial
  progress toward structural reform and better fiscal management. The
  government readily met all IMF/WB targets in December 1993. The budget
  deficit had been dramatically reduced; the government workforce had
  been cut by 25%; large amounts of domestic debt had been retired;
  arrears to the IMF, World Bank, and other creditors had been reduced.
  On the negative side, continued incursions by the Liberian rebels,
  bandits, and army deserters in southern and eastern Sierra Leone have
  severely strained the economy and threaten economically critical
  regions of the country.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $4.5 billion (FY93 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  35% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $68 million 
expenditures: 
  $118 million, including capital expenditures of $28 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $149 million (f.o.b., FY92)
commodities: 
  rutile 51%, bauxite 19%, diamonds 15%, coffee 5%
partners: 
  US, UK, Belgium, Germany, other Western Europe
Imports: 
  $131 million (c.i.f., FY92)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs 33%, machinery and equipment 19%, fuels 16%
partners: 
  US, EC countries, Japan, China, Nigeria
External debt: 
  $633 million (FY92 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1.2% (FY91); accounts for 11% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  85,000 kW
production: 
  185 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  45 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  mining (diamonds, bauxite, rutile), small-scale manufacturing
  (beverages, textiles, cigarettes, footwear), petroleum refinery
Agriculture: 
  accounts for over 30% of GDP and two-thirds of the labor force;
  largely subsistence farming; cash crops - coffee, cocoa, palm kernels;
  harvests of food staple rice meets 80% of domestic needs; annual fish
  catch averages 53,000 metric tons
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $161 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $848
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $18 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $101 million 
Currency: 
  1 leone (Le) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  leones (Le) per US$1 - 578.17 (January 1994), 567.46 (1993), 499.44
  (1992), 295.34 (1991), 144.9275 (1990), 58.1395 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Sierra Leone, Communications

Railroads: 
  84 km 1.067-meter narrow-gauge mineral line is used on a limited basis
  because the mine at Marampa is closed
Highways: 
total: 
  7,400 km 
paved: 
  1,150 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel 490 km; improved earth 5,760 km 
Inland waterways: 
  800 km; 600 km navigable year round
Ports: 
  Freetown, Pepel, Bonthe
Merchant marine: 
  1 cargo ship (over 1,000 GRT) totaling 5,592 GRT/9,107 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  11 
usable: 
  7 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  marginal telephone and telegraph service; national microwave radio
  relay system unserviceable at present; 23,650 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, 1 FM, 1 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Sierra Leone, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Police, Security Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,006,280; fit for military service 487,158 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $6 million, 0.7% of GDP (1988 est.)


@Singapore, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, between Malaysia and Indonesia
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  632.6 sq km 
land area: 
  622.6 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  193 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  12 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm
International disputes: 
  two islands in dispute with Malaysia
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid, rainy; no pronounced rainy or dry seasons;
  thunderstorms occur on 40% of all days (67% of days in April)
Terrain: 
  lowland; gently undulating central plateau contains water catchment
  area and nature preserve
Natural resources: 
  fish, deepwater ports 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  4% 
permanent crops: 
  7% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  5% 
other: 
  84% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  industrial pollution; limited water supply; limited land availability
  presents waste disposal problems
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  focal point for Southeast Asian sea routes

@Singapore, People

Population: 
  2,859,142 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.12% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  16.52 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.3 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.95 years 
male: 
  73.17 years 
female: 
  78.94 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.88 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Singaporean(s) 
adjective: 
  Singapore 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Chinese 76.4%, Malay 14.9%, Indian 6.4%, other 2.3% 
Religions: 
  Buddhist (Chinese), Muslim (Malays), Christian, Hindu, Sikh, Taoist,
  Confucianist 
Languages: 
  Chinese (official), Malay (official and national), Tamil (official),
  English (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  88% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  84% 
Labor force: 
  1,485,800 
by occupation: 
  financial, business, and other services 30.2%, manufacturing 28.4%,
  commerce 22.0%, construction 9.0%, other 10.4% (1990)

@Singapore, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Singapore 
conventional short form: 
  Singapore 
Digraph: 
  SN
Type: 
  republic within Commonwealth 
Capital: 
  Singapore 
Administrative divisions: 
  none
Independence: 
  9 August 1965 (from Malaysia)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 9 August (1965) 
Constitution: 
  3 June 1959, amended 1965; based on preindependence State of Singapore
  Constitution
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President ONG Teng Cheong (since 1 September 1993) election last held
  28 August 1993 (next to be held NA August 1997); results - President
  ONG was elected with 59% of the vote in the country's first popular
  election for president
head of government: 
  Prime Minister GOH Chok Tong (since 28 November 1990); Deputy Prime
  Minister LEE Hsien Loong (since 28 November 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president, responsible to parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held 31 August 1991 (next to be held 31 August 1996);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (81 total) PAP 77, SDP
  3, WP 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
government: 
  People's Action Party (PAP), GOH Chok Tong, secretary general
opposition: 
  Workers' Party (WP), J. B. JEYARETNAM; Singapore Democratic Party
  (SDP), CHIAM See Tong; National Solidarity Party (NSP), leader NA;
  Barisan Sosialis (BS, Socialist Front), leader NA
Member of: 
  APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, C, CCC, COCOM (cooperating), CP, ESCAP, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNIKOM,
  UNTAC, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Sellapan Rama NATHAN 
chancery: 
  1824 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 667-7555 
FAX: 
  (202) 265-7915 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant) 
embassy: 
  30 Hill Street, Singapore 0617 
mailing address: 
  FPO AP 96534 
telephone: 
  [65] 338-0251 
FAX: 
  [65] 338-5010 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white; near the hoist side
  of the red band, there is a vertical, white crescent (closed portion
  is toward the hoist side) partially enclosing five white five-pointed
  stars arranged in a circle

@Singapore, Economy

Overview: 
  Singapore has an open entrepreneurial economy with strong service and
  manufacturing sectors and excellent international trading links
  derived from its entrepot history. The economy registered nearly 10%
  growth in 1993 while stemming inflation. The construction and
  financial services industries and manufacturers of computer-related
  components have led economic growth. Rising labor costs continue to be
  a threat to Singapore's competitiveness, but there are indications
  that productivity is keeping up. In applied technology, per capita
  output, investment, and labor discipline, Singapore has key attributes
  of a developed country.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $42.4 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  9.9% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $15,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.4% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.7% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $11.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $10.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.9 billion (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $61.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  computer equipment, rubber and rubber products, petroleum products,
  telecommunications equipment
partners: 
  US 21%, Malaysia 12%, Hong Kong 8%, Japan 8%, Thailand 6% (1992)
Imports: 
  $66.4 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  aircraft, petroleum, chemicals, foodstuffs
partners: 
  Japan 21%, US 16%, Malaysia 15%, Saudi Arabia 5%, Taiwan 4%
External debt: 
  $0; Singapore is a net creditor
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.3% (1992); accounts for 28% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  4,860,000 kW
production: 
  18 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,420 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum refining, electronics, oil drilling equipment, rubber
  processing and rubber products, processed food and beverages, ship
  repair, entrepot trade, financial services, biotechnology
Agriculture: 
  occupies a position of minor importance in the economy;
  self-sufficient in poultry and eggs; must import much of other food;
  major crops - rubber, copra, fruit, vegetables
Illicit drugs: 
  transit point for Golden Triangle heroin going to the US, Western
  Europe, and the Third World; also a major money-laundering center
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-83), $590 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 Singapore dollar (S$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Singapore dollars (S$) per US$1 - 1.6032 (January 1994), 1.6158
  (1993), 1.6290 (1992), 1.7276 (1991), 1.8125 (1990), 1.9503 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Singapore, Communications

Railroads: 
  38 km of 1.000-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  2,644 km (1985)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Singapore
Merchant marine: 
  533 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 10,656,067 GRT/17,009,400 DWT,
  bulk 87, cargo 125, chemical tanker 14, combination bulk 3,
  combination ore/oil 8, container 80, liquefied gas 4, livestock
  carrier 1, oil tanker 179, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated cargo 3,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, specialized tanker 2, vehicle carrier 20 
note: 
  many Singapore flag ships are foreign owned
Airports: 
total: 
  10 
usable: 
  10 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  good domestic facilities; good international service; good radio and
  television broadcast coverage; 1,110,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 13 AM, 4 FM, 2 TV; submarine cables extend to Malaysia
  (Sabah and Peninsular Malaysia), Indonesia, and the Philippines;
  satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Pacific Ocean
  INTELSAT

@Singapore, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, People's Defense Force, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 857,824; fit for military service 630,055 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.7 billion, 6% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Slovakia, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between Hungary and Poland
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  48,845 sq km 
land area: 
  48,800 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about twice the size of New Hampshire
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,355 km, Austria 91 km, Czech Republic 215 km, Hungary 515 km,
  Poland 444 km, Ukraine 90 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Gabcikovo Dam dispute with Hungary; unresolved property issues with
  Czech Republic over redistribution of former Czechoslovak federal
  property
Climate: 
  temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters
Terrain: 
  rugged mountains in the central and northern part and lowlands in the
  south
Natural resources: 
  brown coal and lignite; small amounts of iron ore, copper and
  manganese ore; salt
Land use: 
arable land: 
  NA% 
permanent crops: 
  NA% 
meadows and pastures: 
  NA% 
forest and woodland: 
  NA% 
other: 
  NA% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  acid rain damaging forests
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection; signed, but not ratified - Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  landlocked

@Slovakia, People

Population: 
  5,403,505 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.53% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.55 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.28 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  10.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.81 years 
male: 
  68.66 years 
female: 
  77.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.96 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Slovak(s) 
adjective: 
  Slovak 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Slovak 85.6%, Hungarian 10.8%, Gypsy 1.5% (the 1992 census figures
  underreport the Gypsy/Romany community, which could reach 500,000 or
  more), Czech 1.1%, Ruthenian 15,000, Ukrainian 13,000, Moravian 6,000,
  German 5,000, Polish 3,000
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 60.3%, atheist 9.7%, Protestant 8.4%, Orthodox 4.1%,
  other 17.5% 
Languages: 
  Slovak (official), Hungarian 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  2.484 million 
by occupation: 
  industry 33.2%, agriculture 12.2%, construction 10.3%, communication
  and other 44.3% (1990)

@Slovakia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Slovak Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Slovakia 
local long form: 
  Slovenska Republika 
local short form: 
  Slovensko 
Digraph: 
  LO
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Bratislava 
Administrative divisions: 
  4 departments (kraje, singular - Kraj) Bratislava, Zapadoslovensky,
  Stredoslovensky, Vychodoslovensky
Independence: 
  1 January 1993 (from Czechoslovakia)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of Slovak National Uprising, August 29 (1944) 
Constitution: 
  ratified 1 September 1992; fully effective 1 January 1993
Legal system: 
  civil law system based on Austro-Hungarian codes; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; legal code modified to comply with the
  obligations of Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
  and to expunge Marxist-Leninist legal theory
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Michal KOVAC (since 8 February 1993); election last held 8
  February 1993 (next to be held NA 1998); results - Michal KOVAC
  elected by the National Council
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Jozef MORAVCIK (since 16 March 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president on recommendation of the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Council (Narodni Rada): 
  elections last held 5-6 June 1992 (next to be held 31
  September-1October 1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats
  - (150 total) Movement for a Democratic Slovakia 55, Party of the
  Democratic Left 28, Christian Democratic Movement 18, Slovak National
  Party 9, National Democratic Party 5, Hungarian Christian Democratic
  Movement/Coexistence 14, Democratic Union of Slovakia 16, independents
  5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Movement for a Democratic Slovakia, Vladimir MECIAR, chairman; Party
  of the Democratic Left, Peter WEISS, chairman; Christian Democratic
  Movement, Jan CARNOGURSKY; Slovak National Party, Jan SLOTA, chairman;
  Hungarian Christian Democratic Movement, Vojtech BUGAR; National
  Democratic Party - New Alternative, Ludovit CERNAK, chairman;
  Democratic Union of Slovakia, Jozef MORAVCIK, chairman; Coexistence
  Movement, Miklos DURAY, chairman
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Green Party; Social Democratic Party in Slovakia; Freedom Party;
  Slovak Christian Union; Hungarian Civic Party
Member of: 
  BIS, CCC, CE (guest), CEI, CERN, COCOM (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, ECE,
  FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, NACC, NSG, PCA, UN (as of 8 January 1993), UNAVEM II, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMUR, UNPROFOR, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Bravislav LICHARDUS 
chancery: 
  (temporary) Suite 330, 2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 965-5161 
FAX: 
  (202) 965-5166 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassdor Theodore RUSSELL 
embassy: 
  Hviezdoslavovo Namesite 4, 81102 Bratislava 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [42] (7) 330-861 
FAX: 
  [42] (7) 335-439 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red
  superimposed with the Slovak cross in a shield centered on the hoist
  side; the cross is white centered on a background of red and blue

@Slovakia, Economy

Overview: 
  The dissolution of Czechoslovakia into two independent states - the
  Czech Republic and Slovakia - on 1 January 1993 has complicated the
  task of moving toward a more open and decentralized economy. The old
  Czechoslovakia, even though highly industrialized by East European
  standards, suffered from an aging capital plant, lagging technology,
  and a deficiency in energy and many raw materials. In January 1991,
  approximately one year after the end of communist control of Eastern
  Europe, the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic launched a sweeping
  program to convert its almost entirely state-owned and controlled
  economy to a market system. In 1991-92 these measures resulted in
  privatization of some medium- and small-scale economic activity and
  the setting of more than 90% of prices by the market - but at a cost
  in inflation, unemployment, and lower output. For Czechoslovakia as a
  whole inflation in 1991 was roughly 50% and output fell 15%. In 1992
  in Slovakia, inflation slowed to an estimated 8.7% and the estimated
  fall in GDP was a more moderate 7%. In 1993 GDP fell roughly 5%, with
  the disruptions from the separation from the Czech lands probably
  accounting for half the decline; exports to the Czech Republic fell
  about 35%. Bratislava adopted an austerity program in June and
  devalued its currency 10% in July. In 1993, inflation rose an
  estimated 23%, unemployment topped 14%, and the budget deficit
  exceeded the IMF target of $485 million by over $200 million. By
  yearend 1993 Bratislava estimated that 29% of GDP was being produced
  in the private sector. The forecast for 1994 is gloomy; Bratislava
  optimistically projects no growth in GDP, 17% unemployment, a $425
  million budget deficit, and 12% inflation. At best, if Slovakia stays
  on track with the IMF, GDP could fall by only 2-3% in 1994 and
  unemployment could be held under 18%, but a currency devaluation will
  likely drive inflation above 15%.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $31 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  23% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  14.4% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $4.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $5.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $5.13 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment; chemicals; fuels, minerals, and
  metals; agricultural products
partners: 
  Czech Republic, CIS republics, Germany, Poland, Austria, Hungary,
  Italy, France, US, UK
Imports: 
  $5.95 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment; fuels and lubricants; manufactured
  goods; raw materials; chemicals; agricultural products
partners: 
  Czech Republic, CIS republics, Germany, Austria, Poland, Switzerland,
  Hungary, UK, Italy
External debt: 
  $3.2 billion hard currency indebtedness (31 December 1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -13.5% (December 1993 over December 1992)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,800,000 kW
production: 
  24 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,550 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  brown coal mining, chemicals, metal-working, consumer appliances,
  fertilizer, plastics, armaments
Agriculture: 
  largely self-sufficient in food production; diversified crop and
  livestock production, including grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops,
  fruit, hogs, cattle, and poultry; exporter of forest products
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin bound for Western
  Europe
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  the former Czechoslovakia was a donor - $4.2 billion in bilateral aid
  to non-Communist less developed countries (1954-89)
Currency: 
  1 koruna (Sk) = 100 halierov
Exchange rates: 
  koruny (Sk) per US$1 - 32.9 (December 1993), 28.59 (December 1992),
  28.26 (1992), 29.53 (1991), 17.95 (1990), 15.05 (1989); note - values
  before 1993 reflect Czechoslovak exchange rate
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Slovakia, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,669 km total (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  17,650 km (1990)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Inland waterways: 
  NA km
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products NA km; natural gas 2,700 km 
Ports: 
  maritime outlets are in Poland (Gdynia, Gdansk, Szczecin), Croatia
  (Rijeka), Slovenia (Koper), Germany (Hamburg, Rostock); principal
  river ports are Komarno on the Danube and Bratislava on the Danube
Merchant marine: 
  total 19 (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 309,502 GRT/521,997 DWT, bulk
  13, cargo 6 
note: 
  most under the flag of Saint Vincent
Airports: 
total: 
  46 
usable: 
  32 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  7 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  18 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  NA

@Slovakia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Civil Defense, Railroad Units 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,426,290; fit for military service 1,095,604; reach
  military age (18) annually 48,695 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  8.2 billion koruny, NA% of GDP (1993 est.); note - conversion of
  defense expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate
  could produce misleading results


@Slovenia, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea, between
  Austria and Croatia
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  20,296 sq km 
land area: 
  20,296 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,045 km, Austria 262 km, Croatia 501 km, Italy 199 km, Hungary
  83 km 
Coastline: 
  32 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  dispute with Croatia over fishing rights in the Adriatic and over some
  border areas; the border issue is currently under negotiation
Climate: 
  Mediterranean climate on the coast, continental climate with mild to
  hot summers and cold winters in the plateaus and valleys to the east
Terrain: 
  a short coastal strip on the Adriatic, an alpine mountain region
  adjacent to Italy, mixed mountain and valleys with numerous rivers to
  the east
Natural resources: 
  lignite coal, lead, zinc, mercury, uranium, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  45% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  Sava River polluted with domestic and industrial waste; heavy metals
  and toxic chemicals along coastal waters; forest damage near Koper
  from air pollution originating at metallurgical and chemical plants
natural hazards: 
  subject to flooding and earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Slovenia, People

Population: 
  1,972,227 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.23% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.81 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.5 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.36 years 
male: 
  70.49 years 
female: 
  78.44 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.67 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Slovene(s) 
adjective: 
  Slovenian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Slovene 91%, Croat 3%, Serb 2%, Muslim 1%, other 3% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 96% (including 2% Uniate), Muslim 1%, other 3% 
Languages: 
  Slovenian 91%, Serbo-Croatian 7%, other 2% 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  786,036 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 2%, manufacturing and mining 46%

@Slovenia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Slovenia 
conventional short form: 
  Slovenia 
local long form: 
  Republika Slovenije 
local short form: 
  Slovenija 
Digraph: 
  SI
Type: 
  emerging democracy 
Capital: 
  Ljubljana 
Administrative divisions: 
  60 provinces (pokajine, singular - pokajina) Ajdovscina, Brezice,
  Celje, Cerknica, Crnomelj, Dravograd, Gornja Radgona, Grosuplje,
  Hrastnik Lasko, Idrija, Ilirska Bistrica, Izola, Jesenice, Kamnik,
  Kocevje, Koper, Kranj, Krsko, Lenart, Lendava, Litija,
  Ljubljana-Bezigrad, Ljubljana-Center, Ljubljana-Moste-Polje,
  Ljubljana-Siska, Ljubljana-Vic-Rudnik, Ljutomer, Logatec, Maribor,
  Metlika, Mozirje, Murska Sobota, Nova Gorica, Novo Mesto, Ormoz,
  Pesnica, Piran, Postojna, Ptuj, Radlje Ob Dravi, Radovljica, Ravne Na
  Koroskem, Ribnica, Ruse, Sentjur Pri Celju, Sevnica, Sezana, Skofja
  Loka, Slovenj Gradec, Slovenska Bistrica, Slovenske Konjice, Smarje
  Pri Jelsah, Tolmin, Trbovlje, Trebnje, Trzic, Velenje, Vrhnika,
  Zagorje Ob Savi, Zalec
Independence: 
  25 June 1991 (from Yugoslavia)
National holiday: 
  Statehood Day, 25 June (1991) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 23 December 1991, effective 23 December 1991
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  16 years of age, if employed;  18 years of age, universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Milan KUCAN (since 22 April 1990); election last held 6
  December 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results - Milan KUCAN
  reelected by direct popular vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Janez DRNOVSEK (since 14 May 1992); Deputy Prime
  Minister Lojze PETERLE (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly
State Assembly: 
  elections last held 6 December 1992 (next to be held NA 1996); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (total 90) LDS 22, SKD 15,
  United List (former Communists and allies) 14, Slovene National Party
  12, SLS 10, Democratic Party 6, ZS 5, SDSS 4, Hungarian minority 1,
  Italian minority 1
State Council: 
  will become operational after next election in 1996; in the election
  of 6 December 1992 40 members were elected to represent local and
  socioeconomic interests
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Constitutional Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Slovene Christian Democrats (SKD), Lozje PETERLE, chairman; Liberal
  Democratic (LDS), Janez DRNOVSEK, chairman; Social-Democratic Party of
  Slovenia (SDSS), Joze PUCNIK, chairman; Socialist Party of Slovenia
  (SSS), Viktor ZAKELJ, chairman; Greens of Slovenia (ZS), Dusan PLUT,
  chairman; National Democratic, Rajko PIRNAT, chairman; Democratic
  Peoples Party, Marjan PODOBNIK, chairman; Reformed Socialists (former
  Communist Party), Ciril RIBICIC, chairman; United List (former
  Communists and allies); Slovene National Party, leader NA; Democratic
  Party, Igor BAVCAR; Slovene People's Party (SLS), Ivan OMAN
note: 
  parties have changed as of the December 1992 elections
Other political or pressure groups: 
  none
Member of: 
  CCC, CE, CEI, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU,
  NAM (guest), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ernest PETRIC 
chancery: 
  1525 New Hampshir Avenue NW, Washington, DC, 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 667-5363 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador E. Allan WENDT 
embassy: 
  P.O. Box 254, Prazakova 4, 61000 Ljubljana 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [386] (61) 301-427/472/485 
FAX: 
  [386] (61) 301-401 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red with the
  Slovenian seal (a shield with the image of Triglav in white against a
  blue background at the center, beneath it are two wavy blue lines
  depicting seas and rivers, and around it, there are three six-sided
  stars arranged in an inverted triangle); the seal is located in the
  upper hoist side of the flag centered in the white and blue bands

@Slovenia, Economy

Overview: 
  Slovenia was by far the most prosperous of the former Yugoslav
  republics, with a per capita income more than twice the Yugoslav
  average, indeed not far below the levels in neighboring Austria and
  Italy. Because of its strong ties to Western Europe and the small
  scale of damage during its brief fight for independence from
  Yugoslavia, Slovenia has the brightest prospects among the former
  Yugoslav republics for economic recovery over the next few years. The
  dissolution of Yugoslavia, however, has led to severe short-term
  dislocations in production, employment, and trade ties. For example,
  overall industrial production has fallen 26% since 1990; particularly
  hard hit have been the iron and steel, machine-building, chemical, and
  textile industries. Meanwhile, the continued fighting in other former
  Yugoslav republics has led to further destruction of long-established
  trade channels and to an influx of tens of thousands of Croatian and
  Bosnian refugees. The key program for breaking up and privatizing
  major industrial firms was established in late 1992. Despite slow
  progress in privatization Slovenia has reasonable prospects for an
  upturn in 1994. Bright spots for encouraging Western investors are
  Slovenia's comparatively well-educated work force, its developed
  infrastructure, and its Western business attitudes, but instability in
  Croatia is a deterrent. Slovenia in absolute terms is a small economy,
  and a little Western investment would go a long way.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $15 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  0% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $7,600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  22.9% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  15.5% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $5.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 38%, other manufactured goods 44%,
  chemicals 9%, food and live animals 4.6%, raw materials 3%, beverages
  and tobacco less than 1% (1992)
partners: 
  Germany 27%, Croatia 14%, Italy 13%, France 9% (1992)
Imports: 
  $5.3 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and transport equipment 35%, other manufactured goods 26.7%,
  chemicals 14.5%, raw materials 9.4%, fuels and lubricants 7%, food and
  live animals 6% (1992)
partners: 
  Germany 23%, Croatia 14%, Italy 14%, France 8%, Austria 8% (1992)
External debt: 
  $1.9 billion 
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2.8% (1993); accounts for 30% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,900,000 kW
production: 
  10 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,090 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  ferrous metallurgy and rolling mill products, aluminum reduction and
  rolled products, lead and zinc smelting, electronics (including
  military electronics), trucks, electric power equipment, wood
  products, textiles, chemicals, machine tools
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 5% of GDP; dominated by stock breeding (sheep and cattle)
  and dairy farming; main crops - potatoes, hops, hemp, flax; an export
  surplus in these commodities; Slovenia must import many other
  agricultural products and has a negative overall trade balance in this
  sector
Illicit drugs: 
  NA
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 tolar (SlT) = 100 stotins
Exchange rates: 
  tolars (SIT) per US$1 - 112 (June 1993), 28 (January 1992)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Slovenia, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,200 km, 1.435 m gauge (1991)
Highways: 
total: 
  14,553 km 
paved: 
  10,525 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 4,028 km 
Inland waterways: 
  NA
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 290 km; natural gas 305 km 
Ports: 
  coastal - Koper
Merchant marine: 
  19 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 309,502 GRT/521,997 DWT
  controlled by Slovenian owners, bulk 13, cargo 6 
note: 
  most under the flag of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; no ships
  remain under the Slovenian flag
Airports: 
total: 
  14 
usable: 
  13 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  6 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  130,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 6 AM, 5 FM, 7 TV; 370,000
  radios; 330,000 TVs

@Slovenia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Slovene Defense Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 513,885; fit for military service 411,619; reach
  military age (19) annually 15,157 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  13.5 billion tolars, 4.5% of GDP (1993); note - conversion of the
  military budget into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Solomon Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Melanesia, just east of Papua New Guinea in the South Pacific
  Ocean
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  28,450 sq km 
land area: 
  27,540 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  5,313 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical monsoon; few extremes of temperature and weather
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged mountains with some low coral atolls
Natural resources: 
  fish, forests, gold, bauxite, phosphates, lead, zinc, nickel 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  93% 
other: 
  4% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; limited arable land
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons, but they are rarely destructive; geologically
  active region with frequent earth tremors
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  located just east of Papua New Guinea in the South Pacific Ocean

@Solomon Islands, People

Population: 
  385,811 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.43% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  38.93 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.63 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.48 years 
male: 
  68.05 years 
female: 
  73.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.73 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Solomon Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Solomon Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Melanesian 93%, Polynesian 4%, Micronesian 1.5%, European 0.8%,
  Chinese 0.3%, other 0.4% 
Religions: 
  Anglican 34%, Roman Catholic 19%, Baptist 17%, United
  (Methodist/Presbyterian) 11%, Seventh-Day Adventist 10%, other
  Protestant 5% 
Languages: 
  Melanesian pidgin in much of the country is lingua franca, English
  spoken by 1%-2% of population
note: 
  120 indigenous languages
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  23,448 economically active
by occupation: 
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 32.4%, services 25%, construction,
  manufacturing, and mining 7.0%, commerce, transport, and finance 4.7%
  (1984)

@Solomon Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Solomon Islands 
former: 
  British Solomon Islands 
Digraph: 
  BP
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Honiara 
Administrative divisions: 
  7 provinces and 1 town*; Central, Guadalcanal, Honiara*, Isabel,
  Makira, Malaita, Temotu, Western
Independence: 
  7 July 1978 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 7 July (1978) 
Constitution: 
  7 July 1978
Legal system: 
  common law
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Sir George LEPPING (since 27 June 1989, previously acted as
  governor general since 7 July 1988) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Francis Billy HILLY (since June 1993); Deputy Prime
  Minister Francis SAEMALA (since June 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on advice of the prime
  minister from members of parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Parliament: 
  elections last held NA May 1993 (next to be held NA 1997); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (47 total) National Unity Group
  21, PAP 8, National Action Party 6, LP 4, UP 3, Christian Fellowship
  2, NFP 1, independents 2
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's Alliance Party (PAP); United Party (UP), leader NA; Solomon
  Islands Liberal Party (SILP), Bartholemew ULUFA'ALU; Nationalist Front
  for Progress (NFP), Andrew NORI; Labor Party (LP), Joses TUHANUKU;
  National Action Party, leader NA; Christian Fellowship, leader NA;
  National Unity Group, Solomon MAMALONI
Member of: 
  ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, LORCS, SPARTECA, SPC,
  SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); ambassador traditionally resides in Honiara (Solomon
  Islands)
US diplomatic representation: 
  embassy closed July 1993; the ambassador to Papua New Guinea is
  accredited to the Solomon Islands
Flag: 
  divided diagonally by a thin yellow stripe from the lower hoist-side
  corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is blue with five white
  five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern; the lower triangle is
  green

@Solomon Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The bulk of the population depend on subsistence agriculture, fishing,
  and forestry for at least part of their livelihood. Most manufactured
  goods and petroleum products must be imported. The islands are rich in
  undeveloped mineral resources such as lead, zinc, nickel, and gold.
  The economy suffered from a severe cyclone in mid-1986 that caused
  widespread damage to the infrastructure. In 1993, the government was
  working with the IMF to develop a structural adjustment program to
  address the country's fiscal deficit.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $900 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.8% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,500 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  13% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $48 million 
expenditures: 
  $107 million, including capital expenditures of $45 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $84 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  fish 46%, timber 31%, palm oil 5%, cocoa, copra
partners: 
  Japan 39%, UK 23%, Thailand 9%, Australia 5%, US 2% (1991)
Imports: 
  $110 million (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  plant and machinery manufactured goods, food and live animals, fuel
partners: 
  Australia 34%, Japan 16%, Singapore 14%, NZ 9%
External debt: 
  $128 million (1988 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -3.8% (1991 est.); accounts for 5% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  21,000 kW
production: 
  39 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  115 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  copra, fish (tuna)
Agriculture: 
  including fishing and forestry, accounts for 31% of GDP; mostly
  subsistence farming; cash crops - cocoa, beans, coconuts, palm
  kernels, timber; other products - rice, potatoes, vegetables, fruit,
  cattle, pigs; not self-sufficient in food grains; 90% of the total
  fish catch of 44,500 metric tons was exported (1988)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1980-89), $250 million 
Currency: 
  1 Solomon Islands dollar (SI$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Solomon Islands dollars (SI$) per US$1 - 3.2383 (November 1993),
  2.9281 (1992), 2.7148 (1991), 2.5288 (1990), 2.2932 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Solomon Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  1,300 km 
paved: 
  30 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 290 km; earth 980 km 
note: 
  in addition, there are 800 km of private logging and plantation roads
  of varied construction (1982)
Ports: 
  Honiara, Ringi Cove
Airports: 
total: 
  31 
usable: 
  30 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  3,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 4 AM, no FM, no TV; 1 Pacific
  Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Solomon Islands, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Police Force 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Somalia, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, bordering the northwestern Indian Ocean, south of the
  Arabian Peninsula
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  637,660 sq km 
land area: 
  627,340 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,366 km, Djibouti 58 km, Ethiopia 1,626 km, Kenya 682 km 
Coastline: 
  3,025 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  200 nm
International disputes: 
  southern half of boundary with Ethiopia is a Provisional
  Administrative Line; territorial dispute with Ethiopia over the Ogaden
Climate: 
  desert; northeast monsoon (December to February), cooler southwest
  monsoon (May to October); irregular rainfall; hot, humid periods
  (tangambili) between monsoons
Terrain: 
  mostly flat to undulating plateau rising to hills in north
Natural resources: 
  uranium and largely unexploited reserves of iron ore, tin, gypsum,
  bauxite, copper, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  46% 
forest and woodland: 
  14% 
other: 
  38% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  use of contaminated water contributes to health problems;
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  recurring droughts; frequent dust storms over eastern plains in summer
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea; signed, but not
  ratified - Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban
Note: 
  strategic location on Horn of Africa along southern approaches to Bab
  el Mandeb and route through Red Sea and Suez Canal

@Somalia, People

Population: 
  6,666,873 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.24% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.97 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  13.53 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  125.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  54.75 years 
male: 
  54.49 years 
female: 
  55.01 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  7.25 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Somali(s) 
adjective: 
  Somali 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Somali 85%, Bantu, Arabs 30,000, Europeans 3,000, Asians 800
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 
Languages: 
  Somali (official), Arabic, Italian, English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  24% 
male: 
  36% 
female: 
  14% 
Labor force: 
  2.2 million (very few are skilled laborers)
by occupation: 
  pastoral nomad 70%, agriculture, government, trading, fishing,
  handicrafts, and other 30%
note: 
  53% of population of working age (1985)

@Somalia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Somalia 
former: 
  Somali Republic 
Digraph: 
  SO
Type: 
  none 
Capital: 
  Mogadishu 
Administrative divisions: 
  18 regions (plural - NA, singular - gobolka); Awdal, Bakool, Banaadir,
  Bari, Bay, Galguduud, Gedo, Hiiraan, Jubbada Dhexe, Jubbada Hoose,
  Mudug, Nugaal, Sanaag, Shabeellaha Dhexe, Shabeellaha Hoose, Sool,
  Togdheer, Woqooyi Galbeed
Independence: 
  1 July 1960 (from a merger of British Somaliland, which became
  independent from the UK on 26 June 1960, and Italian Somaliland, which
  became independent from the Italian-administered UN trusteeship on 1
  July 1960, to form the Somali Republic)
National holiday: 
  NA
Constitution: 
  25 August 1979, presidential approval 23 September 1979
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
  Somalia has no functioning government; presidential elections last
  held 23 December 1986 (next to be held NA); results - President SIAD
  was reelected without opposition
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral People's Assembly
People's Assembly (Golaha Shacbiga): 
  elections last held 31 December 1984 (next to be held NA); results -
  SRSP was the only party; seats - (177 total, 171 elected) SRSP 171;
  note - the United Somali Congress (USC) ousted the regime of Maj. Gen.
  Mohamed SIAD Barre on 27 January 1991; the provisional government has
  promised that a democratically elected government will be established
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (non-functioning)
Political parties and leaders: 
  the United Somali Congress (USC) ousted the former regime on 27
  January 1991; formerly the only party was the Somali Revolutionary
  Socialist Party (SRSP), headed by former President and Commander in
  Chief of the Army Maj. Gen. Mohamed SIAD Barre
Other political or pressure groups: 
  numerous clan and subclan factions are currently vying for power
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Somalian Embassy ceased operations on 8 May 1991
US diplomatic representation: 
  the US Embassy in Mogadishu was evacuated and closed indefinitely in
  January 1991; United States Liaison Office (USLO) opened in December
  1992
Flag: 
  light blue with a large white five-pointed star in the center; design
  based on the flag of the UN (Italian Somaliland was a UN trust
  territory)

@Somalia, Economy

Overview: 
  One of the world's poorest and least developed countries, Somalia has
  few resources. Moreover, much of the economy has been devastated by
  the civil war. Agriculture is the most important sector, with
  livestock accounting for about 40% of GDP and about 65% of export
  earnings. Nomads and seminomads who are dependent upon livestock for
  their livelihoods make up more than half of the population. Crop
  production generates only 10% of GDP and employs about 20% of the work
  force. The main export crop is bananas; sugar, sorghum, and corn are
  grown for the domestic market. The small industrial sector is based on
  the processing of agricultural products and accounts for less than 10%
  of GDP. Greatly increased political turmoil in 1991-93 has resulted in
  a substantial drop in output, with widespread famine.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  210% (1989)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $58 million (1990 est.)
commodities: 
  bananas, live animals, fish, hides
partners: 
  Saudi Arabia, Italy, FRG (1986)
Imports: 
  $249 million (1990 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum products, foodstuffs, construction materials
partners: 
  US 13%, Italy, FRG, Kenya, UK, Saudi Arabia (1986)
External debt: 
  $1.9 billion (1989)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0% (1990); accounts for 4% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  former 75,000 kW is almost completely shut down by the destruction of
  the civil war; UN, relief organizations, and foreign military units in
  Somalia use their own portable power systems
production: 
  NA
consumption per capita: 
  NA
Industries: 
  a few small industries, including sugar refining, textiles, petroleum
  refining; probably shut down by the widespread destruction during the
  civil war
Agriculture: 
  dominant sector, led by livestock raising (cattle, sheep, goats);
  crops - bananas, sorghum, corn, mangoes, sugarcane; not
  self-sufficient in food; distribution of food disrupted by civil
  strife; fishing potential largely unexploited
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $639 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $3.8
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $1.1 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $336 million 
Currency: 
  1 Somali shilling (So. Sh.) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Somali shillings (So. Sh.) per US$1 - 2,616 (1 July 1993), 4,200
  (December 1992), 3,800.00 (December 1990), 490.7 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Somalia, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  22,500 km 
paved: 
  2,700 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 3,000 km; improved, stabilized earth 16,800 km (1992)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 15 km 
Ports: 
  Mogadishu, Berbera, Chisimayu (Kismaayo), Bender Cassim (Boosaaso)
Merchant marine: 
  2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,554 GRT/6,892 DWT, cargo 1,
  refrigerated cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  76 
usable: 
  59 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  8 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  24 
Telecommunications: 
  the public telecommunications system was completely destroyed or
  dismantled by the civil war factions; all relief organizations depend
  on their own private systems (1993)

@Somalia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  NA
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,630,864; fit for military service 915,368 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@South Africa, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, at the extreme southern tip of the continent
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1,219,912 sq km 
land area: 
  1,219,912 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas
note: 
  includes Prince Edward Islands (Marion Island and Prince Edward
  Island)
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,750 km, Botswana 1,840 km, Lesotho 909 km, Mozambique 491 km,
  Namibia 855 km, Swaziland 430 km, Zimbabwe 225 km 
Coastline: 
  2,798 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  the dispute with Namibia over Walvis Bay and 12 offshore islands has
  been resolved and these territories were transferred to Namibian
  sovereignty on 1 March 1994; Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
  negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African territories
  that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long ago part of the
  Swazi Kingdom
Climate: 
  mostly semiarid; subtropical along coast; sunny days, cool nights
Terrain: 
  vast interior plateau rimmed by rugged hills and narrow coastal plain
Natural resources: 
  gold, chromium, antimony, coal, iron ore, manganese, nickel,
  phosphates, tin, uranium, gem diamonds, platinum, copper, vanadium,
  salt, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  65% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  21% 
Irrigated land: 
  11,280 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lack of important arterial rivers or lakes requires extensive water
  conservation and control measures; growth in water usage threatens to
  outpace supply; pollution of rivers from agricultural runoff and urban
  discharge; air pollution resulting in acid rain; soil erosion;
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  subject to prolonged droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of
  the Sea
Note: 
  South Africa completely surrounds Lesotho and almost completely
  surrounds Swaziland

@South Africa, People

Population: 
  43,930,631 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.62% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  33.58 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.53 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  47.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.11 years 
male: 
  62.37 years 
female: 
  67.94 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.37 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  South African(s) 
adjective: 
  South African 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 75.2%, white 13.6%, Colored 8.6%, Indian 2.6% 
Religions: 
  Christian (most whites and Coloreds and about 60% of blacks), Hindu
  (60% of Indians), Muslim 2% 
Languages: 
  eleven official languages, including Afrikaans, English, Ndebele,
  Pedi, Sotho, Swati, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  76% 
male: 
  78% 
female: 
  75% 
Labor force: 
  13.4 million economically active (1990)
by occupation: 
  services 35%, agriculture 30%, industry 20%, mining 9%, other 6%

@South Africa, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of South Africa 
conventional short form: 
  South Africa 
Abbreviation: 
  RSA 
Digraph: 
  SF
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Pretoria (administrative); Cape Town (legislative);  Bloemfontein
  (judicial)
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces; Eastern Cape, Eastern Transvaal, Kwa Zulu/Natal, Northern
  Cape, Northern Transvaal, Northwest, Orange Free State,
  Pretoria-Witwatersrand-Vereeniging, Western Cape
note: 
  previously the administrative divisions consisted of 4 provinces;
  Cape, Natal, Orange Free State, Transvaal; there were 10 homelands not
  recognized by the US - 4 independent (Bophuthatswana, Ciskei,
  Transkei, Venda) and 6 other (Gazankulu, Kangwane, KwaNdebele,
  KwaZulu, Lebowa, QwaQwa)
Independence: 
  31 May 1910 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Republic Day, 31 May (1910) 
Constitution: 
  27 April 1994 (interim constitution, replacing the constitution of 3
  September 1984)
Legal system: 
  based on Roman-Dutch law and English common law; accepts compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Executive President Nelson MANDELA (since 10 May 1994); Deputy
  Executive President Frederik W. DE KLERK (since 10 May 1994); Deputy
  Executive President Thabo MBEKI (since 10 May 1994) 
note: 
  any political party that wins 20% or more of the National Assembly
  votes in a general election is entitled to name a Deputy Executive
  President
cabinet: 
  Cabinet appointed by the Executive President
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections held 26-29 April 1994 (next to be held NA); results - ANC
  62.6%, NP 20.4%, IFP 10.5%, FF 2.2%, DP 1.7%, PAC 1.2%, ACDP 0.5%,
  other 0.9%; seats - (400 total) ANC 252, NP 82, IFP 43, FF 9, DP 7,
  PAC 5, ACDP 2
Senate: 
  the Senate is composed of members who are nominated by the nine
  provincial parliaments (which are elected in parallel with the
  National Assembly) and has special powers to protect regional
  interests, including the right to limited self-determination for
  ethnic minorities; seats - (90 total) ANC 61, NP 17, FF 4, IFP 5, DP 3
note: 
  when the National Assembly meets in joint session with the Senate to
  consider the provisions of the Constitution, the combined group is
  referred to as the Constitutional Assembly
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  African National Congress (ANC), Cyril RAMAPHOSA; National Party (NP),
  Frederik W. DE KLERK, president; Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP),
  Mangosuthu BUTHELEZI, president; Freedom Front (FF), Constand VILJOEN,
  president; Democratic Party (DP); Pan Africanist Congress (PAC),
  Clarence MAKWETU, president; African Christian Democratic Party (ACDP)
note: 
  in addition to these seven parties which won seats in the National
  Assembly, twelve other parties won votes in the national elections in
  April 1994
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA;; 
Member of: 
  BIS, CCC, ECA, GATT, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO (suspended), ICC, IDA,
  IFC, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC, ISO, ITU (suspended), LORCS, OAU, SACU, UN,
  UNCTAD, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO (suspended), ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Harry Heinz SCHWARZ 
chancery: 
  3051 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 232-4400 
consulate(s) general: 
  Beverly Hills (California), Chicago, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Princeton N. LYMAN 
embassy: 
  877 Pretorius St., Arcadia 0083 
mailing address: 
  P.O. Box 9536, Pretoria 0001 
telephone: 
  [27] (12) 342-1048 
FAX: 
  [27] (12) 342-2244 or 2299 
consulate(s) general: 
  Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg 
Flag: 
  two equal width horizontal bands of red (top) and blue separated by a
  central green band which splits into a horozontal Y, the arms of which
  end at the corners of the hoist side, embracing a black isoceles
  triangle from which the arms are separated by narrow yellow bands; the
  red and blue bands are separated from the green band and its arms by
  narrow white stripes
note: 
  prior to 26 April 1994 the flag was actually four flags in one - three
  miniature flags reproduced in the center of the white band of the
  former flag of the Netherlands, which has three equal horizontal bands
  of orange (top), white, and blue; the miniature flags are a vertically
  hanging flag of the old Orange Free State with a horizontal flag of
  the UK adjoining on the hoist side and a horizontal flag of the old
  Transvaal Republic adjoining on the other side

@South Africa, Economy

Overview: 
  Many of the white one-seventh of the South African population enjoy
  incomes, material comforts, and health and educational standards equal
  to those of Western Europe. In contrast, most of the remaining
  population suffers from the poverty patterns of the Third World,
  including unemployment and lack of job skills. The main strength of
  the economy lies in its rich mineral resources, which provide
  two-thirds of exports. Economic developments for the remainder of the
  1990s will be driven largely by the new government's attempts to
  improve black living conditions and to set the country on an
  aggressive export-led growth path. The shrinking economy in recent
  years has absorbed less than 5% of the more than 300,000 workers
  entering the labor force annually. Local economists estimate that the
  economy must grow between 5% and 6% in real terms annually to absorb
  all of the new entrants.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $171 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1.1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.7% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  50% (1994 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $26.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $34 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.5 billion (FY94
  est.)
Exports: 
  $24.3 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  gold 27%, other minerals and metals 20-25%, food 5%, chemicals 3%
partners: 
  Italy, Japan, US, Germany, UK, other EC countries, Hong Kong
Imports: 
  $18.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery 32%, transport equipment 15%, chemicals 11%, oil, textiles,
  scientific instruments
partners: 
  Germany, US, Japan, UK, Italy
External debt: 
  $17 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%; accounts for about 40% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  46,000,000 kW
production: 
  180 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,100 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  mining (world's largest producer of platinum, gold, chromium),
  automobile assembly, metalworking, machinery, textile, iron and steel,
  chemical, fertilizer, foodstuffs
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 5% of GDP and 30% of labor force; diversified
  agriculture, with emphasis on livestock; products - cattle, poultry,
  sheep, wool, milk, beef, corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruits, vegetables;
  self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment center of heroin and cocaine; cocaine consumption on the
  rise
Economic aid: 
  many aid packages for the new government are still being prepared;
  current aid pledges include US $600 million over 3 years; UK $150
  million over 3 years; Australia $21 million over 3 years
Currency: 
  1 rand (R) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  rand (R) per US$1 - 3.4551 (March 1994), 3.2636 (1993), 2.8497 (1992),
  2.7563 (1991), 2.5863 (1990), 2.6166 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@South Africa, Communications

Railroads: 
  20,638 km route distance total; 20,324 km of 1.067-meter gauge
  trackage (counts double and multiple tracking as single track); 314 km
  of 610 mm gauge; substantial electrification of 1.067 meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  188,309 km 
paved: 
  54,013 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel, improved earth 134,296 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 931 km; petroleum products 1,748 km; natural gas 322 km 
Ports: 
  Durban, Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Richards Bay, Saldanha, Mosselbaai
Merchant marine: 
  5 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 213,273 GRT/201,043 DWT,
  container 4, vehicle carrier 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  886 
usable: 
  718 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  140 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  5 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  213 
Telecommunications: 
  the system is the best developed, most modern, and has the highest
  capacity in Africa; it consists of carrier-equipped open-wire lines,
  coaxial cables, radio relay links, fiber optic cable, and
  radiocommunication stations; key centers are Bloemfontein, Cape Town,
  Durban, Johannesburg, Port Elizabeth, and Pretoria; over 4,500,000
  telephones; broadcast stations - 14 AM, 286 FM, 67 TV; 1 submarine
  cable; satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 2
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT

@South Africa, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) includes Army, Navy,
  Air Force, and Medical Services of the former South Africa, the armed
  forces of the former homelands, and the ANC and PAC military
  components; the initial strength of the SANDF has been set at about
  100,000 active duty members with plans to reduce it to about 40,000 by
  1997; it is manned mostly by nonwhites, but the higher officer grades
  are held by whites; the South African Police (SAP) have incorporated
  the police forces of the former homelands since the elections of 1994;
  a National Peacekeeping Force (NPKF) to ensure peaceful proceedures
  during the 1994 elections was established briefly from the military
  components of the principal political factions, but was dissolved on 2
  June 1994, following the elections.
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 10,557,346; fit for military service 6,437,240; reach
  military age (18) annually 431,832 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.9 billion, about 2.5% of GDP (FY93
  budget)


@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southern South America, in the South Atlantic Ocean, off the south
  Argentine coast, southeast of the Falkland Islands
Map references: 
  Antarctic Region 
Area: 
total area: 
  4,066 sq km 
land area: 
  4,066 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Rhode Island
note: 
  includes Shag Rocks, Clerke Rocks, Bird Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  NA km
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  administered by the UK, claimed by Argentina
Climate: 
  variable, with mostly westerly winds throughout the year, interspersed
  with periods of calm; nearly all precipitation falls as snow
Terrain: 
  most of the islands, rising steeply from the sea, are rugged and
  mountainous; South Georgia is largely barren and has steep,
  glacier-covered mountains; the South Sandwich Islands are of volcanic
  origin with some active volcanoes
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (largely covered by permanent ice and snow with some sparse
  vegetation consisting of grass, moss, and lichen)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  the South Sandwich Islands are subject to active volcanism
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  the north coast of South Georgia has several large bays, which provide
  good anchorage; reindeer, introduced early in this century, live on
  South Georgia; weather conditions generally make it difficult to
  approach the South Sandwich Islands

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous population; there is a small military garrison on South
  Georgia, and the British Antarctic Survey has a biological station on
  Bird Island; the South Sandwich Islands are uninhabited

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
conventional short form: 
  none 
Digraph: 
  SX
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  none; Grytviken on South Georgia is the garrison town
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 14 June (1982) 
Constitution: 
  3 October 1985
Legal system: 
  English common law
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by
  Commissioner David Everard TATHAM (since August 1992; resident at
  Stanley, Falkland Islands) 
Legislative branch: 
  no elections
Judicial branch: 
  none

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  Some fishing takes place in adjacent waters. There is a potential
  source of income from harvesting fin fish and krill. The islands
  receive income from postage stamps produced in the UK.
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $291,777 
expenditures: 
  $451,000, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  900 kW
production: 
  2 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  NA (1992)

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Grytviken on South Georgia
Airports: 
total: 
  5 
usable: 
  5 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  coastal radio station at Grytviken; no broadcast stations

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Spain, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Europe, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and the
  Mediterranean Sea, between Portugal and France
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  504,750 sq km 
land area: 
  499,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Oregon
note: 
  includes Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, and five places of
  sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco -
  Ceuta, Mellila, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
  Velez de la Gomera
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,903.2 km, Andorra 65 km, France 623 km, Gibraltar 1.2 km,
  Portugal 1,214 km 
Coastline: 
  4,964 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Gibraltar question with UK; Spain controls five places of sovereignty
  (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco - the coastal
  enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which Morocco contests, as well as the
  islands of Penon de Alhucemas, Penon de Velez de la Gomera, and Islas
  Chafarinas
Climate: 
  temperate; clear, hot summers in interior, more moderate and cloudy
  along coast; cloudy, cold winters in interior, partly cloudy and cool
  along coast
Terrain: 
  large, flat to dissected plateau surrounded by rugged hills; Pyrenees
  in north
Natural resources: 
  coal, lignite, iron ore, uranium, mercury, pyrites, fluorspar, gypsum,
  zinc, lead, tungsten, copper, kaolin, potash, hydropower 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  31% 
permanent crops: 
  10% 
meadows and pastures: 
  21% 
forest and woodland: 
  31% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  33,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  pollution of the Mediterranean Sea from untreated sewage and effluents
  from the offshore production of oil and gas; air pollution;
  deforestation; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber,
  Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location along approaches to Strait of Gibraltar

@Spain, People

Population: 
  39,302,665 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.25% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  11.05 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.82 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  77.71 years 
male: 
  74.45 years 
female: 
  81.21 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.4 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Spaniard(s) 
adjective: 
  Spanish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  composite of Mediterranean and Nordic types
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 99%, other sects 1% 
Languages: 
  Castilian Spanish, Catalan 17%, Galician 7%, Basque 2% 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  95% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  14.621 million 
by occupation: 
  services 53%, industry 24%, agriculture 14%, construction 9% (1988)

@Spain, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Spain 
conventional short form: 
  Spain 
local short form: 
  Espana 
Digraph: 
  SP
Type: 
  parliamentary monarchy 
Capital: 
  Madrid 
Administrative divisions: 
  17 autonomous communities (comunidades autonomas, singular - comunidad
  autonoma); Andalucia, Aragon, Asturias, Canarias, Cantabria,
  Castilla-La Mancha, Castilla y Leon, Cataluna, Communidad Valencia,
  Extremadura, Galicia, Islas Baleares, La Rioja, Madrid, Murcia,
  Navarra, Pais Vasco
note: 
  there are five places of sovereignty on and off the coast of Morocco
  (Ceuta, Mellila, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
  Velez de la Gomera) with administrative status unknown
Independence: 
  1492 (expulsion of the Moors and unification)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 12 October 
Constitution: 
  6 December 1978, effective 29 December 1978
Legal system: 
  civil law system, with regional applications; does not accept
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King JUAN CARLOS I (since 22 November 1975) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Felipe GONZALEZ Marquez (since 2 December 1982); Deputy
  Prime Minister Narcis SERRA y Serra (since 13 March 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; designated by the prime minister
Council of State: 
  is the supreme consultative organ of the government
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral The General Courts or National Assembly (Las Cortes
  Generales)
Senate (Senado): 
  elections last held 6 June 1993 (next to be held by NA June 1997);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (255 total) PSOE 117,
  PP 107, CiU 15, PNV 5, IU 2, other 9
Congress of Deputies (Congreso de los Diputados): 
  elections last held 6 June 1993 (next to be held by NA June 1997);
  results by percent of party NA; seats - (350 total) PSOE 159, PP 141,
  IU 18, CiU 17, PNV 5, CN 4, HB 2, other 4
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Tribunal Supremo) 
Political parties and leaders: 
principal national parties, from right to left: 
  Popular Party (PP), Jose Maria AZNAR; Social Democratic Center (CDS),
  Rafael Calvo ORTEGA; Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE), Felipe
  GONZALEZ Marquez, secretary general; Socialist Democracy Party (DS),
  Ricardo Garcia DAMBORENEA; Spanish Communist Party (PCE), Julio
  ANGUITA; United Left (IU) a coalition of parties including the PCE, a
  branch of the PSOE, and other small parties, Julio ANGUITA
chief regional parties: 
  Convergence and Unity (CiU), Jordi PUJOL Saley and Miguel ROCA in
  Catalonia; Basque Nationalist Party (PNV), Xabier ARZALLUS and Jose
  Antonio ARDANZA; Basque Solidarity (EA), Carlos GARAICOETXEA Urizza;
  Basque Popular Unity (HB), Jon IDIGORAS and Inaki ESNAOLA; Basque
  Socialist Party (PSE), coalition of the PSE, EE and PSOE, Jose Maria
  BANEGAS and Jon LARRINAGA; Andalusian Progress Party (PA), Pedro
  PACHECO; Canarian Coalition (CN), Dimas MARTIN; Catalan Republican
  Left, Angel COLOM; Galician Coalition, Senen BERNARDEZ; Aragonese
  Regionalist Party (PAR), Jose Maria MUR Bernad; Valencian Union (UV),
  Vicente GONZALEZ Lizondo, Manuel CAMPILLOS Martinez
Other political or pressure groups: 
  on the extreme left, the Basque Fatherland and Liberty (ETA) and the
  First of October Antifascist Resistance Group (GRAPO) use terrorism to
  oppose the government; free labor unions (authorized in April 1977)
  include the Communist-dominated Workers Commissions (CCOO); the
  Socialist General Union of Workers (UGT), and the smaller independent
  Workers Syndical Union (USO); business and landowning interests; the
  Catholic Church; Opus Dei; university students
Member of: 
  AG (observer), AsDB, Australian Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, COCOM,
  CSCE, EBRD, AfDB, EC, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, FAO, G-8, GATT, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAIA
  (observer), LORCS, MTRC, NACC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNOMOZ, UNPROFOR, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jaime De OJEDA y Eiseley 
chancery: 
  2700 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-0190 or 0191 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York,
  San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard N. GARDNER 
embassy: 
  Serrano 75, 28006 Madrid 
mailing address: 
  APO AE 09642 
telephone: 
  [34] (1) 577-4000 
FAX: 
  [34] (1) 577-5735 
consulate(s) general: 
  Barcelona 
consulate(s): 
  Bilbao 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of red (top), yellow (double width), and red
  with the national coat of arms on the hoist side of the yellow band;
  the coat of arms includes the royal seal framed by the Pillars of
  Hercules, which are the two promontories (Gibraltar and Ceuta) on
  either side of the eastern end of the Strait of Gibraltar

@Spain, Economy

Overview: 
  After the economic boom of 1986-90, the Spanish economy fell into
  recession along with the economies of other EU member states. Real GDP
  barely grew in 1992 and declined by approximately 1% in 1993.
  Unemployment, now nearly one-fourth of the workforce, and the sharp
  downturn in business investment have contributed to sagging domestic
  demand. Devaluation of the peseta since September 1992 has made
  Spanish exports more competitive, but an export-led recovery in 1994
  will depend largely on economic recovery in Spain's major market - the
  other EU nations. A solid recovery will also require appropriate
  domestic policy actions, including controlling the budget deficit and
  wage increases, reforming labor market regulations, and possibly
  loosening monetary policy another notch. Foreign investors,
  principally from other EU countries, have invested over $60 billion in
  Spain since 1986. Despite the recession, inflation remained at about
  5% in 1993. The main source of inflationary pressure is the fiscal
  deficit.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $498 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $12,700 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.5% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  22% (yearend 1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $97.7 billion 
expenditures: 
  $128 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $72.8 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  cars and trucks, semifinished manufactured goods, foodstuffs,
  machinery
partners: 
  EC 71.2%, US 4.8%, other developed countries 7.9% (1992)
Imports: 
  $92.5 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery, transport equipment, fuels, semifinished goods, foodstuffs,
  consumer goods, chemicals
partners: 
  EC 60.7%, US 7.4%, other developed countries 11.5%, Middle East 5.9%
  (1992)
External debt: 
  $90 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1.7% (1992)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  46,600,000 kW
production: 
  157 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,000 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles and apparel (including footwear), food and beverages, metals
  and metal manufactures, chemicals, shipbuilding, automobiles, machine
  tools, tourism
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 5% of GDP and 14% of labor force; major products -
  grain, vegetables, olives, wine grapes, sugar beets, citrus fruit,
  beef, pork, poultry, dairy; largely self-sufficient in food; fish
  catch of 1.4 million metric tons is among top 20 nations
Illicit drugs: 
  key European gateway country for Latin American cocaine and North
  African hashish entering the European market
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-87), $1.9 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-79), $545
  million 
note: 
  not currently a recipient
Currency: 
  1 peseta (Pta) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates: 
  pesetas (Ptas) per US$1 - 136.6 (May 1994), 127.26 (1993), 102.38
  (1992), 103.91 (1991), 101.93 (1990), 118.38 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Spain, Communications

Railroads: 
  15,430 km total; Spanish National Railways (RENFE) operates 12,691 km
  (all 1,668-mm gauge, 6,184 km electrified, and 2,295 km double track);
  FEVE (government-owned narrow-gauge railways) operates 1,821 km
  (predominantly 1,000-mm gauge, 441 km electrified); privately owned
  railways operate 918 km (predominantly 1,000-mm gauge, 512 km
  electrified, and 56 km double track)
Highways: 
total: 
  318,022 km (1988)
paved: 
  178,092 km (including 2,142 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  139,930 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,045 km, but of minor economic importance
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 265 km; petroleum products 1,794 km; natural gas 1,666 km 
Ports: 
  Algeciras, Alicante, Almeria, Barcelona, Bilbao, Cadiz, Cartagena,
  Castellon de la Plana, Ceuta, El Ferrol del Caudillo, Puerto de Gijon,
  Huelva, La Coruna, Las Palmas (Canary Islands), Mahon, Malaga,
  Melilla, Rota, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Sagunto, Tarragona, Valencia,
  Vigo, and 175 minor ports
Merchant marine: 
  192 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,328,730 GRT/2,213,671 DWT,
  bulk 21, cargo 55, chemical tanker 14, container 11, liquefied gas 5,
  oil tanker 29, passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 12, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 33, short-sea passenger 6, specialized tanker 3, vehicle carrier
  1 
Airports: 
total: 
  105 
usable: 
  99 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  60 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  22 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  26 
Telecommunications: 
  generally adequate, modern facilities; 15,350,464 telephones;
  broadcast stations - 190 AM, 406 (134 repeaters) FM, 100 (1,297
  repeaters) TV; 22 coaxial submarine cables; 2 communications satellite
  earth stations operating in INTELSAT (Atlantic Ocean and Indian
  Ocean); MARECS, INMARSAT, and EUTELSAT systems; tropospheric links

@Spain, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Civil Guard, National Police, Coastal
  Civil Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 10,377,990; fit for military service 8,396,405; reach
  military age (20) annually 337,764 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $5.8 billion, 1.3% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Spratly Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, in the South China Sea, between Vietnam and the
  Philippines
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia 
Area: 
total area: 
  NA sq km but less than 5 km2
land area: 
  less than 5 sq km 
comparative area: 
  NA
note: 
  includes 100 or so islets, coral reefs, and sea mounts scattered over
  the South China Sea
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  926 km 
Maritime claims: 
  NA
International disputes: 
  all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam;
  parts of them are claimed by Malaysia and the Philippines; in 1984,
  Brunei established an exclusive economic zone, which encompasses
  Louisa Reef, but has not publicly claimed the island
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  flat
Natural resources: 
  fish, guano, undetermined oil and natural gas potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to typhoons
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategically located near several primary shipping lanes in the
  central South China Sea; serious navigational hazard; includes
  numerous small islands, atolls, shoals, and coral reefs

@Spratly Islands, People

Population: 
  no indigenous inhabitants; note - there are scattered garrisons

@Spratly Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Spratly Islands 
Digraph: 
  PG

@Spratly Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is limited to commercial fishing. The proximity to
  nearby oil- and gas-producing sedimentary basins suggests the
  potential for oil and gas deposits, but the region is largely
  unexplored, and there are no reliable estimates of potential reserves;
  commercial exploitation has yet to be developed.
Industries: 
  none

@Spratly Islands, Communications

Ports: 
  no natural harbors
Airports: 
total: 
  4 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 

@Spratly Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  about 50 small islands or reefs are occupied by China, Malaysia, the
  Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam


@Sri Lanka, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, 29 km southeast of India across the Palk Strait in the
  Indian Ocean
Map references: 
  Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  65,610 sq km 
land area: 
  64,740 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than West Virginia
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,340 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical monsoon; northeast monsoon (December to March); southwest
  monsoon (June to October)
Terrain: 
  mostly low, flat to rolling plain; mountains in south-central interior
Natural resources: 
  limestone, graphite, mineral sands, gems, phosphates, clay 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  16% 
permanent crops: 
  17% 
meadows and pastures: 
  7% 
forest and woodland: 
  37% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  5,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; wildlife populations threatened by
  poaching; coastal degradation from mining activities and increased
  pollution; freshwater resources being polluted by industrial wastes
  and sewage runoff
natural hazards: 
  occasional cyclones and tornadoes
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea,
  Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  strategic location near major Indian Ocean sea lanes

@Sri Lanka, People

Population: 
  18,129,850 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  since the outbreak of hostilities between the government and armed
  Tamil separatists in the mid-1980s, several hundred thousand Tamil
  civilians have fled the island; as of late 1992, nearly 115,000 were
  housed in refugee camps in south India, another 95,000 lived outside
  the Indian camps, and more than 200,000 Tamils have sought political
  asylum in the West
Population growth rate: 
  1.18% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  18.51 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.77 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.91 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  21.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.9 years 
male: 
  69.37 years 
female: 
  74.55 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.12 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Sri Lankan(s) 
adjective: 
  Sri Lankan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Sinhalese 74%, Tamil 18%, Moor 7%, Burgher, Malay, and Vedda 1% 
Religions: 
  Buddhist 69%, Hindu 15%, Christian 8%, Muslim 8% 
Languages: 
  Sinhala (official and national language) 74%, Tamil (national
  language) 18% 
note: 
  English is commonly used in government and is spoken by about 10% of
  the population
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  88% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  84% 
Labor force: 
  6.6 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 45.9%, mining and manufacturing 13.3%, trade and transport
  12.4%, services and other 28.4% (1985 est.)

@Sri Lanka, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka 
conventional short form: 
  Sri Lanka 
former: 
  Ceylon 
Digraph: 
  CE
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Colombo 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 provinces; Central, North Central, North Eastern, North Western,
  Sabaragamuwa, Southern, Uva, Western
Independence: 
  4 February 1948 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence and National Day, 4 February (1948) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 16 August 1978
Legal system: 
  a highly complex mixture of English common law, Roman-Dutch, Muslim,
  Sinhalese, and customary law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Dingiri Banda WIJETUNGA (since 7 May 1993); election last
  held 19 December 1988 (next to be held NA December 1994); results -
  Ranasinghe PREMADASA (UNP) 50%, Sirimavo BANDARANAIKE (SLFP) 45%,
  other 5%; note - following the assassination of President PREMADASA on
  1 May 1993, Prime Minister WIJETUNGA became acting president; on 7 May
  1993, he was confirmed by a vote of Parliament to finish out the term
  of the assassinated president
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president in consultation with the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held 15 February 1989 (next to be held by NA February
  1995); results - UNP 51%, SLFP 32%, SLMC 4%, TULF 3%, USA 3%, EROS 3%,
  MEP 1%, other 3%; seats - (225 total) UNP 125, SLFP 67, other 33
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  United National Party (UNP), Dingiri Banda WIJETUNGA; Sri Lanka
  Freedom Party (SLFP), Sirimavo BANDARANAIKE; Sri Lanka Muslim Congress
  (SLMC), M. H. M. ASHRAFF; All Ceylon Tamil Congress (ACTC), C. G.
  Kumar PONNAMBALAM; People's United Front (MEP, or Mahajana Eksath
  Peramuna), Dinesh GUNAWARDENE; Tamil United Liberation Front (TULF),
  M. SIVASITHAMBARAM; New Socialist Party (NSSP, or Nava Sama Samaja
  Party), Vasudeva NANAYAKKARA; Lanka Socialist Party/Trotskyite (LSSP,
  or Lanka Sama Samaja Party), Colin R. DE SILVA; Sri Lanka People's
  Party (SLMP, or Sri Lanka Mahajana Party), Ossie ABEYGUNASEKERA;
  Communist Party, K. P. SILVA; Communist Party/Beijing (CP/B), N.
  SHANMUGATHASAN; Democratic United National Front (DUNF), G. M.
  PREMACHANDRA; Eelam People's Democratic Party (EPDP), Douglas
  DEVANANDA; Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (TELO), leader NA;
  Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRL), Suresh
  PREMACHANDRAN; Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students (EROS),
  Shankar RAJI; People's Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE),
  Dharmalingam SIDARTHAN; Liberal Party (LP), Chanaka AMARATUNGA; Ceylon
  Workers Congress (CLDC), S. THONDAMAN; several ethnic Tamil and Muslim
  parties, represented in either parliament or provincial councils
note: 
  the United Socialist Alliance (USA), which was formed in 1987 and
  included the NSSP, LSSP, SLMP, CP/M, and CP/B, was defunct as of 1993,
  following the formation of the People's Alliance Party (PEP)
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and other smaller Tamil
  separatist groups; other radical chauvinist Sinhalese groups; Buddhist
  clergy; Sinhalese Buddhist lay groups; labor unions
Member of: 
  AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-24, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, PCA, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ananda W.P. GURUGE 
chancery: 
  2148 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-4025 through 4028 
FAX: 
  (202) 232-7181 
consulate(s): 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Teresita C. SCHAFFER 
embassy: 
  210 Galle Road, Colombo 3 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 106, Colombo 
telephone: 
  [94] (1) 44-80-07 
FAX: 
  [94] (1) 57-42-64 
Flag: 
  yellow with two panels; the smaller hoist-side panel has two equal
  vertical bands of green (hoist side) and orange; the other panel is a
  large dark red rectangle with a yellow lion holding a sword, and there
  is a yellow bo leaf in each corner; the yellow field appears as a
  border that goes around the entire flag and extends between the two
  panels

@Sri Lanka, Economy

Overview: 
  Industry - dominated by the fast-growing apparel industry - has
  surpassed agriculture as the main source of export earnings and
  accounts for over 16% of GDP. The economy has been plagued by high
  rates of unemployment since the late 1970s. Economic growth, which has
  been depressed by ethnic unrest, accelerated in 1991-93 as domestic
  conditions began to improve and conditions for foreign investment
  brightened.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $53.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11.6% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.5 billion (1993)
Exports: 
  $2.3 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  garments and textiles, teas, gems, petroleum products, coconuts,
  rubber, other agricultural products, marine products, graphite
partners: 
  US 33.4%, Germany, UK, Netherlands, Japan, France, Singapore (1992)
Imports: 
  $3 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  food and beverages, textiles and textile materials, petroleum and
  petroleum products, machinery and equipment
partners: 
  Japan, India, US 4.3%, UK, Singapore, Germany, Hong King, Taiwan,
  South Korea (1991)
External debt: 
  $5.2 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 7% (1991 est.); accounts for 16.5% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,300,000 kW
production: 
  3.6 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  200 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  processing of rubber, tea, coconuts, and other agricultural
  commodities; clothing, cement, petroleum refining, textiles, tobacco
Agriculture: 
  accounts for one-fourth of GDP and nearly half of labor force; most
  important staple crop is paddy rice; other field crops - sugarcane,
  grains, pulses, oilseeds, roots, spices; cash crops - tea, rubber,
  coconuts; animal products - milk, eggs, hides, meat; not
  self-sufficient in rice production
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1980-89), $5.1
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $169 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $369 million 
Currency: 
  1 Sri Lankan rupee (SLRe) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Sri Lankan rupees (SLRes) per US$1 - 49.672 (January 1994), 48.322
  (1993), 43.687 (1992), 41.372 (1991), 40.063 (1990), 36.047 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Sri Lanka, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,948 km total (1990); all 1.868-meter broad gauge; 102 km double
  track; no electrification; government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  75,263 km 
paved: 
  mostly bituminous treated 27,637 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel 32,887 km; improved, unimproved earth 14,739 km 
Inland waterways: 
  430 km; navigable by shallow-draft craft
Pipelines: 
  crude oil and petroleum products 62 km (1987)
Ports: 
  Colombo, Trincomalee
Merchant marine: 
  26 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 289,115 GRT/453,609 DWT, bulk 2,
  cargo 12, container 1, oil tanker 3, refrigerated cargo 8 
Airports: 
total: 
  14 
usable: 
  13 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  8 
Telecommunications: 
  very inadequate domestic service, good international service; 114,000
  telephones (1982); broadcast stations - 12 AM, 5 FM, 5 TV; submarine
  cables extend to Indonesia and Djibouti; 2 Indian Ocean INTELSAT earth
  stations

@Sri Lanka, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,906,666; fit for military service 3,825,774; reach
  military age (18) annually 178,213 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $417 million, 3.5% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Sudan, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, along the Red Sea, between Egypt and Eritrea
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,505,810 sq km 
land area: 
  2.376 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than one-quarter the size of the US
Land boundaries: 
  total 7,687 km, Central African Republic 1,165 km, Chad 1,360 km,
  Egypt 1,273 km, Eritrea 605 km, Ethiopia 1,606 km, Kenya 232 km, Libya
  383 km, Uganda 435 km, Zaire 628 km 
Coastline: 
  853 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  18 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  administrative boundary with Kenya does not coincide with
  international boundary; administrative boundary with Egypt does not
  coincide with international boundary creating the "Hala'ib Triangle,"
  a barren area of 20,580 sq km, the dispute over this area escalated in
  1993, this area continues to be in dispute
Climate: 
  tropical in south; arid desert in north; rainy season (April to
  October)
Terrain: 
  generally flat, featureless plain; mountains in east and west
Natural resources: 
  small reserves of petroleum, iron ore, copper, chromium ore, zinc,
  tungsten, mica, silver 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  24% 
forest and woodland: 
  20% 
other: 
  51% 
Irrigated land: 
  18,900 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  contaminated water supplies present human health risks; wildlife
  populations threatened by excessive hunting; soil erosion;
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  dust storms
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity
Note: 
  largest country in Africa; dominated by the Nile and its tributaries

@Sudan, People

Population: 
  29,419,798 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.36% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  41.95 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.09 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -6.25 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  79.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  54.27 years 
male: 
  53.4 years 
female: 
  55.19 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.09 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Sudanese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Sudanese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 52%, Arab 39%, Beja 6%, foreigners 2%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 70% (in north), indigenous beliefs 25%, Christian 5%
  (mostly in south and Khartoum)
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), Nubian, Ta Bedawie, diverse dialects of Nilotic,
  Nilo-Hamitic, Sudanic languages, English 
note: 
  program of Arabization in process
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  27% 
male: 
  43% 
female: 
  12% 
Labor force: 
  6.5 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 80%, industry and commerce 10%, government 6%
note: 
  labor shortages for almost all categories of skilled employment (1983
  est.); 52% of population of working age (1985)

@Sudan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of the Sudan 
conventional short form: 
  Sudan 
local long form: 
  Jumhuriyat as-Sudan 
local short form: 
  As-Sudan 
former: 
  Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 
Digraph: 
  SU
Type: 
  ruling military junta - Revolutionary Command Council - dissolved on
  16 October 1993 and government civilianized
Capital: 
  Khartoum 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 states (wilayat, singular - wilayat or wilayah*); A'ali an Nil, Al
  Wusta*, Al Istiwa'iyah*, Al Khartum, Ash Shamaliyah*, Ash Sharqiyah*,
  Bahr al Ghazal, Darfur, Kurdufan
Independence: 
  1 January 1956 (from Egypt and UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 January (1956) 
Constitution: 
  12 April 1973, suspended following coup of 6 April 1985; interim
  constitution of 10 October 1985 suspended following coup of 30 June
  1989
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and Islamic law; as of 20 January 1991,
  the now defunct Revolutionary Command Council imposed Islamic law in
  the northern states; the council is still studying criminal provisions
  under Islamic law; Islamic law applies to all residents of the six
  northern states regardless of their religion; some separate religious
  courts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
Chief of State and Head of Government: 
  President Lt. General Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR (since 16 October
  1993); prior to 16 October 1993, BASHIR served concurrently as Chief
  of State, Chairman of the RCC, Prime Minister, and Minister of Defence
  (since 30 June 1989);  Vice President Major General al-Zubayr Muhammad
  SALIH (since 19 October 1993); note - upon its dissolution on 16
  October 1993, the RCC's executive and legislative powers were devolved
  to the President and the Transitional National Assembly (TNA), Sudan's
  appointed legislative body
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president; note - on 30 October 1993
  President BASHIR announced a new, predominantly civilian cabinet,
  consisting of 20 federal ministers, most of whom retained their
  previous cabinet positions
note: 
  Lt. Gen. BASHIR's government is dominated by members of Sudan's
  National Islamic Front, a fundamentalist political organization formed
  from the Muslim Brotherhood in 1986; front leader Hasan al-TURABI
  controls Khartoum's overall domestic and foreign policies
Legislative branch: 
  appointed 300-member Transitional National Assembly; officially
  assumes all legislative authority for Sudan until the eventual,
  unspecified resumption of national elections
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Special Revolutionary Courts 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none; banned following 30 June 1989 coup
Other political or pressure groups: 
  National Islamic Front, Hasan al-TURABI
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ahmad SULAYMAN 
chancery: 
  2210 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 338-8565 through 8570 
FAX: 
  (202) 667-2406 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Donald K. PETTERSON 
embassy: 
  Shar'ia Ali Abdul Latif, Khartoum 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 699, Khartoum, or APO AE 09829 
telephone: 
  74700 or 74611 
FAX: 
  Telex 22619 AMEM SD 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black with a
  green isosceles triangle based on the hoist side

@Sudan, Economy

Overview: 
  Sudan is buffeted by civil war, chronic political instability, adverse
  weather, high inflation, a drop in remittances from abroad, and
  counterproductive economic policies. The economy is dominated by
  governmental entities that account for more than 70% of new
  investment. The private sector's main areas of activity are
  agriculture and trading, with most private industrial investment
  predating 1980. The economy's base is agriculture, which employs 80%
  of the work force. Industry mainly processes agricultural items.
  Sluggish economic performance over the past decade, attributable
  largely to declining annual rainfall, has reduced levels of per capita
  income and consumption. A large foreign debt and huge arrearages
  continue to cause difficulties. In 1990 the International Monetary
  Fund took the unusual step of declaring Sudan noncooperative because
  of its nonpayment of arrearages to the Fund. The government
  implemented a comprehensive economic reform program in 1992 that
  included slashing the fiscal deficit, liberalizing foreign exchange
  regulations, and lifting most price controls, but it had backtracked
  on most reforms by mid-1993 because of its fear of generating a
  domestic backlash. The government's failure to pursue economic reform,
  its continued prosecution of the civil war, and its growing
  international isolation have led to a further deterioration of the
  non-agricultural sectors of the economy during 1993. Agriculture, on
  the other hand, after several disappointing years, enjoyed favorable
  growing conditions in 1993, and its strong performance produced an
  overall growth rate in GNP of about 7%.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $21.5 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7% (FY93 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $750 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  105% (FY93 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  30% (FY93 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $374.4 million 
expenditures: 
  $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $214 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $350 million (f.o.b., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  cotton 52%, sesame, gum arabic, peanuts
partners: 
  Western Europe 46%, Saudi Arabia 14%, Eastern Europe 9%, Japan 9%, US
  3% (FY88)
Imports: 
  $1.1 billion (c.i.f., FY93 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, petroleum products, manufactured goods, machinery and
  equipment, medicines and chemicals, textiles
partners: 
  Western Europe 32%, Africa and Asia 15%, US 13%, Eastern Europe 3%
  (FY88)
External debt: 
  $17 billion (June 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.8% (FY93 est.); accounts for 11% of GDP (FY92)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  610,000 kW
production: 
  905 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  40 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  cotton ginning, textiles, cement, edible oils, sugar, soap distilling,
  shoes, petroleum refining
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 35% of GDP and 80% of labor force; water shortages;
  two-thirds of land area suitable for raising crops and livestock;
  major products - cotton, oilseeds, sorghum, millet, wheat, gum arabic,
  sheep; marginally self-sufficient in most foods
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.5 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $5.1
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $3.1 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $588 million 
Currency: 
  1 Sudanese pound (#Sd) = 100 piastres
Exchange rates: 
  official rate - Sudanese pounds (#Sd) per US$1 - 215 (January 1994),
  333.3 (December 1993), 90.1 (March 1992), 5.4288 (1991), 4.5004 (fixed
  rate since 1987); note - the commercial rate is 300 (January 1994)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Sudan, Communications

Railroads: 
  5,516 km total; 4,800 km 1.067-meter gauge, 716 km 1.6096-meter-gauge
  plantation line
Highways: 
total: 
  20,703 km 
paved: 
  bituminous treated 2,000 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 4,000 km; improved earth 2,304 km; unimproved earth  12,399 km 
Inland waterways: 
  5,310 km navigable
Pipelines: 
  refined products 815 km 
Ports: 
  Port Sudan, Sawakin
Merchant marine: 
  10 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 89,842 GRT/122,379 DWT, cargo 8,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  70 
usable: 
  58 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  7 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  29 
Telecommunications: 
  large, well-equipped system by African standards, but barely adequate
  and poorly maintained by modern standards; consists of microwave radio
  relay, cable, radio communications, troposcatter, and a domestic
  satellite system with 14 stations; broadcast stations - 11 AM, 3 TV;
  satellite earth stations for international traffic - 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT and 1 ARABSAT

@Sudan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,640,123; fit for military service 4,080,715; reach
  military age (18) annually 305,885 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $339 million, 2.2% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Suriname, Geography

Location: 
  Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean between
  French Guiana and Guyana
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  163,270 sq km 
land area: 
  161,470 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Georgia
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,707 km, Brazil 597 km, French Guiana 510 km, Guyana 600 km 
Coastline: 
  386 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims area in French Guiana between Litani Rivier and Riviere
  Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa Rivier); claims area in Guyana
  between New (Upper Courantyne) and Courantyne/Koetari Rivers (all
  headwaters of the Courantyne)
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by trade winds
Terrain: 
  mostly rolling hills; narrow coastal plain with swamps
Natural resources: 
  timber, hydropower potential, fish, shrimp, bauxite, iron ore, and
  small amounts of nickel, copper, platinum, gold 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  97% 
other: 
  3% 
Irrigated land: 
  590 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  mostly tropical rain forest; great diversity of flora and fauna which
  for the most part is not threatened because of the lack of
  development; relatively small population most of which lives along the
  coast

@Suriname, People

Population: 
  422,840 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.57% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.31 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  31.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.45 years 
male: 
  66.94 years 
female: 
  72.08 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.79 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Surinamer(s) 
adjective: 
  Surinamese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Hindustani (East Indian) 37%, Creole (black and mixed) 31%, Javanese
  15.3%, Bush black 10.3%, Amerindian 2.6%, Chinese 1.7%, Europeans 1%,
  other 1.1% 
Religions: 
  Hindu 27.4%, Muslim 19.6%, Roman Catholic 22.8%, Protestant 25.2%
  (predominantly Moravian), indigenous beliefs 5% 
Languages: 
  Dutch (official), English widely spoken, Sranan Tongo (Surinamese,
  sometimes called Taki-Taki) is native language of Creoles and much of
  the younger population and is lingua franca among others, Hindi
  Suriname Hindustani (a variant of Bhoqpuri), Javanese 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  95% 
male: 
  95% 
female: 
  95% 
Labor force: 
  104,000 (1984)
by occupation: 
  NA

@Suriname, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Suriname 
conventional short form: 
  Suriname 
local long form: 
  Republiek Suriname 
local short form: 
  Suriname 
former: 
  Netherlands Guiana, Dutch Guiana 
Digraph: 
  NS
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Paramaribo 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 districts (distrikten, singular - distrikt); Brokopondo,
  Commewijne, Coronie, Marowijne, Nickerie, Para, Paramaribo, Saramacca,
  Sipaliwini, Wanica
Independence: 
  25 November 1975 (from Netherlands)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 25 November (1975) 
Constitution: 
  ratified 30 September 1987
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Ronald R. VENETIAAN (since 16 September 1991); Vice
  President and Prime Minister Jules R. AJODHIA (since 16 September
  1991); election last held 6 September 1991 (next to be held NA May
  1996); results - elected by the National Assembly - Ronald VENETIAAN
  (NF) 80% (645 votes), Jules WIJDENBOSCH (NDP) 14% (115 votes), Hans
  PRADE (DA '91) 6% (49 votes)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet of Ministers; appointed by the president from members of the
  National Assembly
note: 
  Commander in Chief of the National Army maintains significant power
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Assemblee Nationale): 
  elections last held 25 May 1991 (next to be held NA May 1996); results
  - percent of vote NA; seats - (51 total) NF 30, NDP 10, DA '91 9,
  Independent 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  The New Front (NF), a coalition of four parties (NPS, VHP, KTPI, SPA),
  leader Ronald R. VENETIAAN; Progressive Reform Party (VHP), Jaggernath
  LACHMON; National Party of Suriname (NPS), Ronald VENETIAAN; Party of
  National Unity and Solidarity (KTPI), Willy SOEMITA; Suriname Labor
  Party (SPA) Fred DERBY; Democratic Alternative '91 (DA '91), Winston
  JESSURUN, a coalition of four parties (AF, HPP, Pendawa Lima, BEP)
  formed in January 1991; Alternative Forum (AF), Gerard BRUNINGS,
  Winston JESSURUN; Reformed Progressive Party (HPP), Panalal PARMESSAR;
  Party for Brotherhood and Unity in Politics (BEP), Caprino ALLENDY;
  Pendawa Lima, Marsha JAMIN; National Democratic Party (NDP), Desire
  BOUTERSE; Progressive Workers' and Farm Laborers' Union (PALU), Ir
  Iwan KROLIS, chairman; 
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Surinamese Liberation Army (SLA), Ronnie BRUNSWIJK, Johan "Castro"
  WALLY; Union for Liberation and Democracy, Kofi AFONGPONG; Mandela
  Bushnegro Liberation Movement, Leendert ADAMS; Tucayana Amazonica,
  Alex JUBITANA, Thomas SABAJO
Member of: 
  ACP, CARICOM (observer), ECLAC, FAO, GATT, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IFAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTERPOL, IOC, INTELSAT (nonsignatory
  user), ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Willem A. UDENHOUT 
chancery: 
  Suite 108, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 244-7488 or 7490 through 7492 
FAX: 
  (202) 244-5878 
consulate(s) general: 
  Miami 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Roger R. GAMBLE   
embassy: 
  Dr. Sophie Redmonstraat 129, Paramaribo 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 1821, Paramaribo 
telephone: 
  [597] 472900, 477881, or 476459 
FAX: 
  [597] 410025 
Flag: 
  five horizontal bands of green (top, double width), white, red
  (quadruple width), white, and green (double width); there is a large
  yellow five-pointed star centered in the red band

@Suriname, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is dominated by the bauxite industry, which accounts for
  15% of GDP and about 70% of export earnings. The economy has been in
  trouble since the Dutch ended development aid in 1982. A drop in world
  bauxite prices which started in the late 1970s and continued until
  late 1986 was followed by the outbreak of a guerrilla insurgency in
  the interior that crippled the important bauxite sector. Although the
  insurgency has since ebbed and the bauxite sector recovered,
  Paramaribo has failed to initiate the economic reforms necessary to
  stabilize the economy or win renewed Dutch aid disbursements. High
  inflation, high unemployment, widespread black market activity, and
  hard currency shortfalls continue to mark the economy.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.17 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.3% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  109% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  16.5% (1990)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $466 million 
expenditures: 
  $716 million, including capital expenditures of $123 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $290 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  alumina, aluminum, shrimp and fish, rice, bananas
partners: 
  Norway 33%, Netherlands 26%, US 13%, Japan 6%, Brazil 6%, UK 3% (1992)
Imports: 
  $250 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs, cotton, consumer goods
partners: 
  US 42%, Netherlands 22%, Trinidad and Tobago 10%, Brazil 5% (1992)
External debt: 
  $180 million (March 1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -5% (1991 est.); accounts for 27% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  458,000 kW
production: 
  2.018 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,920 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  bauxite mining, alumina and aluminum production, lumbering, food
  processing, fishing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 10.4% of GDP and 25% of export earnings; paddy rice
  planted on 85% of arable land and represents 60% of total farm output;
  other products - bananas, palm kernels, coconuts, plantains, peanuts,
  beef, chicken; shrimp and forestry products of increasing importance;
  self-sufficient in most foods
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-83), $2.5 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.5
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 Surinamese guilder, gulden, or florin (Sf.) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Surinamese guilders, gulden, or florins (Sf.) per US$1 - 1.7850 (fixed
  rate); parallel rate 109 (January 1994)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Suriname, Communications

Railroads: 
  166 km total; 86 km 1.000-meter gauge, government owned, and 80 km
  1.435-meter standard gauge; all single track
Highways: 
total: 
  8,300 km 
paved: 
  500 km 
unpaved: 
  bauxite, gravel, crushed stone, improved earth 5,400 km; sand, clay
  2,400 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,200 km; most important means of transport; oceangoing vessels with
  drafts ranging up to 7 m can navigate many of the principal waterways
Ports: 
  Paramaribo, Moengo, Nieuw Nickerie
Merchant marine: 
  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,472 GRT/8,914 DWT, cargo 2,
  container 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  46 
usable: 
  38 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  international facilities good; domestic microwave system; 27,500
  telephones; broadcast stations - 5 AM, 14 FM, 6 TV, 1 shortwave; 2
  Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@Suriname, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Army (including Navy which is company-size, small Air Force
  element), Civil Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 113,963; fit for military service 67,648 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Svalbard

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of Norway) 

@Svalbard, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe in the Arctic Ocean where the Arctic
  Ocean, Barents Sea, Greenland Sea, and Norwegian Sea meet, 445 km
  north of Norway
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  62,049 sq km 
land area: 
  62,049 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than West Virginia
note: 
  includes Spitsbergen and Bjornoya (Bear Island)
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  3,587 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm unilaterally claimed by Norway but not recognized by Russia
territorial sea: 
  4 nm
International disputes: 
  focus of maritime boundary dispute in the Barents Sea between Norway
  and Russia
Climate: 
  arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool summers, cold
  winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and north coasts of
  Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most of the year
Terrain: 
  wild, rugged mountains; much of high land ice covered; west coast
  clear of ice about half the year; fjords along west and north coasts
Natural resources: 
  coal, copper, iron ore, phosphate, zinc, wildlife, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (no trees and the only bushes are crowberry and cloudberry)
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  ice floes often block up the entrance to Bellsund (a transit point for
  coal export) on the west coast and occasionally make parts of the
  northeastern coast inaccessible
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  northernmost part of the Kingdom of Norway; consists of nine main
  islands; glaciers and snowfields cover 60% of the total area

@Svalbard, People

Population: 
  3,018 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -3.5% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  NA
Death rate: 
  NA
Net migration rate: 
  NA
Infant mortality rate: 
  NA
Life expectancy at birth: 
  NA
Total fertility rate: 
  NA
Ethnic divisions: 
  Russian 64%, Norwegian 35%, other 1% (1981)
Languages: 
  Russian, Norwegian 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA 

@Svalbard, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Svalbard 
Digraph: 
  SV
Type: 
  territory of Norway administered by the Ministry of Industry, Oslo,
  through a governor (sysselmann) residing in Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen;
  by treaty (9 February 1920) sovereignty was given to Norway
Capital: 
  Longyearbyen 
Independence: 
  none (territory of Norway)
National holiday: 
  NA 
Legal system: 
  NA 
Executive branch: 
Chief of State: 
  King HARALD V (since 17 January 1991) 
Head of Government: 
  Governor Odd BLOMDAL (since NA); Assistant Governor Jan-Atle HANSEN
  (since NA September 1993) 
Member of: 
  none 
Flag: 
  the flag of Norway is used

@Svalbard, Economy

Overview: 
  Coal mining is the major economic activity on Svalbard. By treaty (9
  February 1920), the nationals of the treaty powers have equal rights
  to exploit mineral deposits, subject to Norwegian regulation. Although
  US, UK, Dutch, and Swedish coal companies have mined in the past, the
  only companies still mining are Norwegian and Russian. The settlements
  on Svalbard are essentially company towns. The Norwegian state-owned
  coal company employs nearly 60% of the Norwegian population on the
  island, runs many of the local services, and provides most of the
  local infrastructure. There is also some trapping of seal, polar bear,
  fox, and walrus.
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $13.3 million 
expenditures: 
  $13.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1990 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  21,000 kW
production: 
  45 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  13,860 kWh (1992)
Currency: 
  1 Norwegian krone (NKr) = 100 oere
Exchange rates: 
  Norwegian kroner (NKr) per US$1 - 7.4840 (January 1994), 7.0941
  (1993), 6.2145 (1992), 6.4829 (1991), 6.2597 (1990), 6.9045 (1989)

@Svalbard, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  limited facilities - Ny-Alesund, Advent Bay
Airports: 
total: 
  4 
usable: 
  4 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  5 meteorological/radio stations; local telephone service; broadcast
  stations - 1 AM, 1 (2 repeaters) FM, 1 TV; satellite communication
  with Norwegian mainland

@Svalbard, Defense Forces

Note: 
  demilitarized by treaty (9 February 1920)


@Swaziland, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, between Mozambique and South Africa
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  17,360 sq km 
land area: 
  17,200 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  total 535 km, Mozambique 105 km, South Africa 430 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Swaziland wants to reincorporate territory along the South African
  border; Mbabane has asked South Africa to open negotiations on border
  adjustments
Climate: 
  varies from tropical to near temperate
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains and hills; some moderately sloping plains
Natural resources: 
  asbestos, coal, clay, cassiterite, hydropower, forests, small gold and
  diamond deposits, quarry stone, and talc 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  NA%
meadows and pastures: 
  67% 
forest and woodland: 
  6% 
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  620 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  limited access to safe drinking water presents human health risks;
  wildlife populations being depleted because of excessive hunting;
  overgrazing; soil degradation; soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; almost completely surrounded by South Africa

@Swaziland, People

Population: 
  936,369 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.21% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.14 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.07 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  93.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  56.39 years 
male: 
  52.4 years 
female: 
  60.5 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.13 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Swazi(s) 
adjective: 
  Swazi 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 97%, European 3% 
Religions: 
  Christian 60%, indigenous beliefs 40% 
Languages: 
  English (official; government business conducted in English), siSwati
  (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1986)
total population: 
  67% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  65% 
Labor force: 
  probably less than 100,000 
by occupation: 
  private sector about 65%, public sector 35%

@Swaziland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Swaziland 
conventional short form: 
  Swaziland 
Digraph: 
  WZ
Type: 
  monarchy; independent member of Commonwealth
Capital: 
  Mbabane (administrative);  Lobamba (legislative)
Administrative divisions: 
  4 districts; Hhohho, Lubombo, Manzini, Shiselweni
Independence: 
  6 September 1968 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Somhlolo (Independence) Day, 6 September (1968) 
Constitution: 
  none; constitution of 6 September 1968 was suspended on 12 April 1973;
  a new constitution was promulgated 13 October 1978, but has not been
  formally presented to the people
Legal system: 
  based on South African Roman-Dutch law in statutory courts, Swazi
  traditional law and custom in traditional courts; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King MSWATI III (since 25 April 1986) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Prince Jameson Mbilini DLAMINI (since 12 November 1993)
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; designated by the monarch
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament is advisory and consists of an upper house or
  Senate and a lower house or House of Assembly; the 30 members of the
  Senate are appointed - 10 by the House of Assembly and 20 by the king;
  the members of the House are elected by popular vote; last election
  held in October 1993
Judicial branch: 
  High Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none; banned by the Constitution promulgated on 13 October 1978
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, PCA,
  SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Absalom Vusani MAMBA 
chancery: 
  3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 362-6683 or 6685 
FAX: 
  (202) 244-8059 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John SPROTT 
embassy: 
  Central Bank Building, Warner Street, Mbabane 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 199, Mbabane 
telephone: 
  [268] 46441 through 46445 
FAX: 
  [268] 45959 
Flag: 
  three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple width), and blue;
  the red band is edged in yellow; centered in the red band is a large
  black and white shield covering two spears and a staff decorated with
  feather tassels, all placed horizontally

@Swaziland, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on subsistence agriculture, which occupies more
  than 60% of the population and contributes nearly 25% to GDP.
  Manufacturing, which includes a number of agroprocessing factories,
  accounts for another quarter of GDP. Mining has declined in importance
  in recent years; high-grade iron ore deposits were depleted in 1978,
  and health concerns cut world demand for asbestos. Exports of sugar
  and forestry products are the main earners of hard currency.
  Surrounded by South Africa, except for a short border with Mozambique,
  Swaziland is heavily dependent on South Africa, from which it receives
  90% of its imports and to which it sends about half of its exports.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $2.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  11% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $342 million 
expenditures: 
  $410 million, including capital expenditures of $130 million (1994
  est.)
Exports: 
  $632 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  sugar, edible concentrates, wood pulp, canned fruit, citrus
partners: 
  South Africa 50% (est.), EC countries, Canada
Imports: 
  $734 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  motor vehicles, machinery, transport equipment, petroleum products,
  foodstuffs, chemicals
partners: 
  South Africa 90% (est.), Switzerland, UK
External debt: 
  $240 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.6% (1991); accounts for 40% of GDP (1989)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  60,000 kW
production: 
  198 million kWh (1991)
consumption per capita: 
  180 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  mining (coal and asbestos), wood pulp, sugar
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 23% of GDP and over 60% of labor force; mostly
  subsistence agriculture; cash crops - sugarcane, cotton, maize,
  tobacco, rice, citrus fruit, pineapples; other crops and livestock -
  corn, sorghum, peanuts, cattle, goats, sheep; not self-sufficient in
  grain
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  bilateral aid (1991) $35 million of which US disbursements $12
  million, UK disbursements $6 million, and Denmark $2 million;
  multilateral aid (1991) $24 million of which EC disbursements $8
  million
Currency: 
  1 lilangeni (E) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  emalangeni (E) per US$1 -3.4551 (March 1994), 3.2636 (1993), 2.8497
  (1992), 2.7563 (1991), 2.5863 (1990), 2.6166 (1989); note - the Swazi
  emalangeni is at par with the South African rand
Fiscal year: 
  1 April - 31 March

@Swaziland, Communications

Railroads: 
  297 km (plus 71 km disused), 1.067-meter gauge, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  2,853 km 
paved: 
  510 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel, stabilized earth 1,230 km; improved earth 1,113
  km 
Airports: 
total: 
  23 
usable: 
  21 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  system consists of carrier-equipped open-wire lines and low-capacity
  microwave links; 17,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 7 AM, 6 FM,
  10 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Swaziland, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force, Royal Swaziland Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 204,608; fit for military service 118,380 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $22 million, NA% of GDP (FY93/94)


@Sweden, Geography

Location: 
  Nordic State, Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between
  Norway and Finland
Map references: 
  Arctic Region, Asia, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  449,964 sq km 
land area: 
  410,928 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,205 km, Finland 586 km, Norway 1,619 km 
Coastline: 
  3,218 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate in south with cold, cloudy winters and cool, partly cloudy
  summers; subarctic in north
Terrain: 
  mostly flat or gently rolling lowlands; mountains in west
Natural resources: 
  zinc, iron ore, lead, copper, silver, timber, uranium, hydropower
  potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  2% 
forest and woodland: 
  64% 
other: 
  27% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,120 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  acid rain damaging soils and lakes; pollution of the North Sea and the
  Baltic Sea
natural hazards: 
  ice floes in the surrounding waters, especially in the Gulf of
  Bothnia, can interfere with navigation
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling;
  signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic location along Danish Straits linking Baltic and North Seas

@Sweden, People

Population: 
  8,778,461 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.52% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.5 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.9 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  2.62 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.25 years 
male: 
  75.47 years 
female: 
  81.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Swede(s) 
adjective: 
  Swedish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  white, Lapp (Sami), foreign born or first-generation immigrants 12%
  (Finns, Yugoslavs, Danes, Norwegians, Greeks, Turks)
Religions: 
  Evangelical Lutheran 94%, Roman Catholic 1.5%, Pentecostal 1%, other
  3.5% (1987)
Languages: 
  Swedish 
note: 
  small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities; immigrants speak native
  languages
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1979 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  4.552 million (84% unionized,1992)
by occupation: 
  community, social and personal services 38.3%, mining and
  manufacturing 21.2%, commerce, hotels, and restaurants 14.1%, banking,
  insurance 9.0%, communications 7.2%, construction 7.0%, agriculture,
  fishing, and forestry 3.2% (1991)

@Sweden, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Sweden 
conventional short form: 
  Sweden 
local long form: 
  Konungariket Sverige 
local short form: 
  Sverige 
Digraph: 
  SW
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Stockholm 
Administrative divisions: 
  24 provinces (lan, singular and plural); Alvsborgs Lan, Blekinge Lan,
  Gavleborgs Lan, Goteborgs och Bohus Lan, Gotlands Lan, Hallands Lan,
  Jamtlands Lan, Jonkopings Lan, Kalmar Lan, Kopparbergs Lan,
  Kristianstads Lan, Kronobergs Lan, Malmohus Lan, Norrbottens Lan,
  Orebro Lan, Ostergotlands Lan, Skaraborgs Lan, Sodermanlands Lan,
  Stockholms Lan, Uppsala Lan, Varmlands Lan, Vasterbottens Lan,
  Vasternorrlands Lan, Vastmanlands Lan
Independence: 
  6 June 1809 (constitutional monarchy established)
National holiday: 
  Day of the Swedish Flag, 6 June 
Constitution: 
  1 January 1975
Legal system: 
  civil law system influenced by customary law; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King CARL XVI GUSTAF (since 19 September 1973); Heir Apparent Princess
  VICTORIA Ingrid Alice Desiree, daughter of the King (born 14 July
  1977) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Carl BILDT (since 3 October 1991); Deputy Prime
  Minister Bengt WESTERBERG (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
parliament (Riksdag): 
  elections last held 15 September 1991 (next to be held NA September
  1994); results - Social Democratic Party 37.6%, Moderate Party
  (conservative) 21.9%, Liberal People's Party 9.1%, Center Party 8.5%,
  Christian Democrats 7.1%, New Democracy 6.7%, Left Party (Communist)
  4.5%, Green Party 3.4%, other 1.2%; seats - (349 total) Social
  Democratic 138, Moderate Party (conservative) 80, Liberal People's
  Party 33, Center Party 31, Christian Democrats 26, New Democracy 25,
  Left Party (Communist) 16; note - the Green Party has no seats in the
  Riksdag because it received less than the required 4% of the vote
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Hogsta Domstolen) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  ruling four-party coalition consists of Moderate Party (conservative),
  Carl BILDT; Liberal People's Party, Bengt WESTERBERG; Center Party,
  Olof JOHANSSON; and the Christian Democratic Party, Alf SVENSSON;
  Social Democratic Party, Ingvar CARLSSON; New Democracy Party, Harriet
  COLLIANDER; Left Party (VP; Communist), Gudrun SCHYMAN; Communist
  Workers' Party, Rolf HAGEL; Green Party, no formal leader
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australian Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN,
  COCOM (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, G-6, G-8, G-9,
  G-10, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTERPOL, INTELSAT, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, MTRC, NAM (guest), NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, ONUSAL, PCA, UN,
  UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM,
  UNMOGIP, UNOMIG, UNOMOZ, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UNTSO, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Carl Henrik LILJEGREN 
chancery: 
  Suites 1200 and 715, 600 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037
telephone: 
  (202) 944-5600 
FAX: 
  (202) 342-1319 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Thomas SIEBERT 
embassy: 
  Strandvagen 101, S-115 89 Stockholm 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [46] (8) 783-5300 
FAX: 
  [46] (8) 661-1964 
Flag: 
  blue with a yellow cross that extends to the edges of the flag; the
  vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side in the style
  of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

@Sweden, Economy

Overview: 
  Aided by a long period of peace and neutrality during World War I
  through World War II, Sweden has achieved an enviable standard of
  living under a mixed system of high-tech capitalism and extensive
  welfare benefits. It has a modern distribution system, excellent
  internal and external communications, and a skilled labor force.
  Timber, hydropower, and iron ore constitute the resource base of an
  economy that is heavily oriented toward foreign trade. Privately owned
  firms account for about 90% of industrial output, of which the
  engineering sector accounts for 50% of output and exports. In the last
  few years, however, this extraordinarily favorable picture has been
  clouded by inflation, growing unemployment, and a gradual loss of
  competitiveness in international markets. Although Prime Minister
  BILDT's center-right minority coalition had hoped to charge ahead with
  free-market-oriented reforms, a skyrocketing budget deficit - almost
  14% of GDP in FY94 projections - and record unemployment have
  forestalled many of the plans. Unemployment in 1993 is estimated at
  around 8% with another 5% in job training. Continued heavy foreign
  exchange speculation forced the government to cooperate in late 1992
  with the opposition Social Democrats on two crisis packages - one a
  severe austerity pact and the other a program to spur industrial
  competitiveness - which basically set economic policy through 1997. In
  November 1992, Sweden broke its tie to the EC's ECU, and the krona has
  since depreciated about 25% against the dollar. The government hopes
  the boost in export competitiveness from the depreciation will help
  lift Sweden out of its 3-year recession. To curb the budget deficit
  and bolster confidence in the economy, BILDT continues to propose cuts
  in welfare benefits, subsidies, defense, and foreign aid. Sweden
  continues to harmonize its economic policies with those of the EU in
  preparation for scheduled membership by early 1995, which will help to
  broaden European economic unity.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $153.7 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -2.7% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $17,600 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.4% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  8.2% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $45.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $73.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY94)
Exports: 
  $49.7 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, motor vehicles, paper products, pulp and wood, iron and
  steel products, chemicals, petroleum and petroleum products
partners: 
  EC 55.8% (Germany 15%, UK 9.7%, Denmark 7.2%, France 5.8%), EFTA 17.4%
  (Norway 8.4%, Finland 5.1%), US 8.2%, Central and Eastern Europe 2.5%
  (1992)
Imports: 
  $42.3 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals, motor
  vehicles, foodstuffs, iron and steel, clothing
partners: 
  EC 53.6% (Germany 17.9%, UK 6.3%, Denmark 7.5%, France 4.9%), EFTA
  (Norway 6.6%, Finland 6%), US 8.4%, Central and Eastern Europe 3%
  (1992)
External debt: 
  $19.5 billion (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0.8% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  39,716,000 kW
production: 
  142.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  16,560 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  iron and steel, precision equipment (bearings, radio and telephone
  parts, armaments), wood pulp and paper products, processed foods,
  motor vehicles
Agriculture: 
  animal husbandry predominates, with milk and dairy products accounting
  for 37% of farm income; main crops - grains, sugar beets, potatoes;
  100% self-sufficient in grains and potatoes; Sweden is about 50%
  self-sufficient in most products; farming accounted for 1.2% of GDP
  and 1.9% of jobs in 1990
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for narcotics shipped via the CIS and Baltic
  states for the European market
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $10.3 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Swedish krona (SKr) = 100 oere
Exchange rates: 
  Swedish kronor (SKr) per US$1 - 8.1255 (January 1994), 7.834 (1993),
  5.8238 (1992), 6.0475 (1991) 5.9188 (1990), 6.4469 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Sweden, Communications

Railroads: 
  12,084 km total; Swedish State Railways (SJ) 11,202 km - 10,819 km
  1.435-meter standard gauge, 6,955 km electrified and 1,152 km double
  track; 182 km 0.891-meter gauge; 117 km rail ferry service;
  privately-owned railways 882 km - 511 km 1.435-meter standard gauge
  (332 km electrified) and 371 km 0.891-meter gauge (all electrified)
Highways: 
total: 
  205,000 km 
paved: 
  69,754 km (including 936 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  gravel 45,900 km; unimproved earth 38,060 km; NA 51,286 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  2,052 km navigable for small steamers and barges
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 84 km 
Ports: 
  Gavle, Goteborg, Halmstad, Helsingborg, Kalmar, Malmo, Stockholm;
  numerous secondary and minor ports
Merchant marine: 
  161 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,049,554 GRT/2,516,350 DWT,
  bulk 10, cargo 24, chemical tanker 25, combination ore/oil 1,
  container 2, oil tanker 30, railcar carrier 2, refrigerated cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 39, short-sea passenger 10, specialized tanker
  4, vehicle carrier 13 
Airports: 
total: 
  252 
usable: 
  248 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  138 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  11 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  94 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent domestic and international facilities; 8,200,000 telephones;
  mainly coaxial and multiconductor cables carry long-distance network;
  parallel microwave network carries primarily radio, TV and some
  telephone channels; automatic system; broadcast stations - 5 AM, 360
  (mostly repeaters) FM, 880 (mostly repeaters) TV; 5 submarine coaxial
  cables; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1
  EUTELSAT

@Sweden, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Swedish Army, Royal Swedish Navy, Swedish Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,146,145; fit for military service 1,874,787; reach
  military age (19) annually 55,262 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $5.2 billion, 2.6% of GDP (FY93/94)


@Switzerland, Geography

Location: 
  Central Europe, between France and Austria
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  41,290 sq km 
land area: 
  39,770 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of New Jersey
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,852 km, Austria 164 km, France 573 km, Italy 740 km,
  Liechtenstein 41 km, Germany 334 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  temperate, but varies with altitude; cold, cloudy, rainy/snowy
  winters; cool to warm, cloudy, humid summers with occasional showers
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains (Alps in south, Jura in northwest) with a central
  plateau of rolling hills, plains, and large lakes
Natural resources: 
  hydropower potential, timber, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  40% 
forest and woodland: 
  26% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  250 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from vehicle emissions and open air burning; acid rain;
  water pollution from increased use of agricultural fertilizers; loss
  of biodiversity
natural hazards: 
  subject to avalanches, landslides, flash floods
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic
  Treaty, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not
  ratified - Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Law of the
  Sea
Note: 
  landlocked; crossroads of northern and southern Europe; along with
  southeastern France and northern Italy, contains the highest
  elevations in Europe

@Switzerland, People

Population: 
  7,040,119 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.7% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.23 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.2 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.97 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  6.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  78.17 years 
male: 
  74.8 years 
female: 
  81.71 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.6 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Swiss (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Swiss 
Ethnic divisions: 
total population: 
  German 65%, French 18%, Italian 10%, Romansch 1%, other 6% 
Swiss nationals: 
  German 74%, French 20%, Italian 4%, Romansch 1%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 47.6%, Protestant 44.3%, other 8.1% (1980)
Languages: 
  German 65%, French 18%, Italian 12%, Romansch 1%, other 4% 
note: 
  figures for Swiss nationals only -
  German 74%, French 20%, Italian 4%, Romansch 1%, other 1% 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  3.31 million (904,095 foreign workers, mostly Italian)
by occupation: 
  services 50%, industry and crafts 33%, government 10%, agriculture and
  forestry 6%, other 1% (1989)

@Switzerland, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Swiss Confederation 
conventional short form: 
  Switzerland 
local long form: 
  Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft (German) Confederation Suisse
  (French)  Confederazione Svizzera (Italian) 
local short form: 
  Schweiz (German) Suisse (French)  Svizzera (Italian) 
Digraph: 
  SZ
Type: 
  federal republic 
Capital: 
  Bern 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 cantons (cantons, singular - canton in French; cantoni, singular -
  cantone in Italian; kantone, singular - kanton in German); Aargau,
  Ausser-Rhoden, Basel-Landschaft, Basel-Stadt, Bern, Fribourg, Geneve,
  Glarus, Graubunden, Inner-Rhoden, Jura, Luzern, Neuchatel, Nidwalden,
  Obwalden, Sankt Gallen, Schaffhausen, Schwyz, Solothurn, Thurgau,
  Ticino, Uri, Valais, Vaud, Zug, Zurich
Independence: 
  1 August 1291 
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Founding of the Swiss Confederation, 1 August
  (1291) 
Constitution: 
  29 May 1874
Legal system: 
  civil law system influenced by customary law; judicial review of
  legislative acts, except with respect to federal decrees of general
  obligatory character; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Otto STICH (1994 calendar year; presidency rotates
  annually); Vice President Kaspar VILLIGER (term runs concurrently with
  that of president) 
cabinet: 
  Federal Council (German - Bundesrat, French - Censeil Federal, Italian
  - Consiglio Federale); elected by the Federal Assembly from own
  members
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Federal Assembly (German - Bundesversammlung, French -
  Assemblee Federale, Italian - Assemblea Federale)
Council of States: 
  (German - Standerat, French - Conseil des Etats, Italian - Consiglio
  degli Stati) elections last held throughout 1991 (next to be held NA
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (46 total) FDP
  18, CVP 16, SVP 4, SPS 3, LPS 3, LdU 1, Ticino League 1
National Council: 
  (German - Nationalrat, French - Conseil National, Italian - Consiglio
  Nazionale) elections last held 20 October 1991 (next to be held NA
  October 1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (200
  total) FDP 44, SPS 42, CVP 37, SVP 25, GPS 14, LPS 10, AP 8, LdU 6, SD
  5, EVP 3, PdA 2, Ticino League 2, other 2
Judicial branch: 
  Federal Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Free Democratic Party (FDP), Bruno HUNZIKER, president; Social
  Democratic Party (SPS), Helmut HUBACHER, chairman; Christian
  Democratic People's Party (CVP), Eva SEGMULLER-WEBER, chairman; Swiss
  People's Party (SVP), Hans UHLMANN, president; Green Party (GPS),
  Peter SCHMID, president; Automobile Party (AP), DREYER; Alliance of
  Independents' Party (LdU), Dr. Franz JAEGER, president; Swiss
  Democratic Party (SD), NA; Evangelical People's Party (EVP), Max
  DUNKI, president; Workers' Party (PdA; Communist), Jean SPIELMANN,
  general secretary; Ticino League, leader NA; Liberal Party (LPS),
  Gilbert COUTAU, president
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australian Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, COCOM
  (cooperating), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, G-8, G-10, GATT, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO,
  MTRC, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, PCA, UN (observer),
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNOMIG, UNPROFOR, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Carlo JAGMETTI 
chancery: 
  2900 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 745-7900 
FAX: 
  (202) 387-2564 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Michael C. POLT 
embassy: 
  Jubilaeumstrasse 93, 3005 Bern 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [41] (31) 357-7011 
FAX: 
  [41] (31) 357-7344 
branch office: 
  Geneva 
consulate(s) general: 
  Zurich 
Flag: 
  red square with a bold, equilateral white cross in the center that
  does not extend to the edges of the flag

@Switzerland, Economy

Overview: 
  Switzerland's economy - one of the most prosperous and stable in the
  world - is nonetheless undergoing a painful adjustment after both the
  inflationary boom of the late-1980s and the electorate's rejection of
  membership in the European Economic Area in 1992. The Swiss finally
  emerged from a three-year recession in mid-1993 and posted a -0.6% GDP
  growth for the year. After a three-year struggle with inflation, the
  Swiss central bank's tight monetary policies have begun to pay off.
  Inflation slowed to 3.3% in 1993 from about 4% in 1992 and is expected
  to slow down further to 1.5% in 1994. Unemployment, however, will
  continue to be a problem over the near term. Swiss unemployment
  reached 5.1% in 1993 and will likely remain at that level through 1994
  before declining in 1995. The voters' rejection of a referendum on
  membership in the EEA, which was supported by most political,
  business, and financial leaders has raised doubts that the country can
  maintain its preeminent prosperity and leadership in commercial
  banking in the twenty-first century. Despite these problems, Swiss per
  capita output, general living standards, education and science, health
  care, and diet remain unsurpassed in Europe. The country has few
  natural resources except for the scenic natural beauty that has made
  it a world leader in tourism. Management-labor relations remain
  generally harmonious.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $149.1 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  -0.6% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $21,300 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  5.1% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $23.7 billion 
expenditures: 
  $26.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $63 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, precision instruments, metal products,
  foodstuffs, textiles and clothing
partners: 
  Western Europe 63.1% (EC countries 56%, other 7.1%), US 8.8%, Japan
  3.4%
Imports: 
  $60.7 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  agricultural products, machinery and transportation equipment,
  chemicals, textiles, construction materials
partners: 
  Western Europe 79.2% (EC countries 72.3%, other 6.9%), US 6.4%
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 0% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  17,710,000 kW
production: 
  56 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  8,200 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  machinery, chemicals, watches, textiles, precision instruments
Agriculture: 
  dairy farming predominates; less than 50% self-sufficient in food;
  must import fish, refined sugar, fats and oils (other than butter),
  grains, eggs, fruits, vegetables, meat
Illicit drugs: 
  money-laundering center
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1970-89), $3.5 billion 
Currency: 
  1 Swiss franc, franken, or franco (SwF) = 100 centimes, rappen, or
  centesimi
Exchange rates: 
  Swiss francs, franken, or franchi (SwF) per US$1 - 1.715 (January
  1994), 1.4776 (1993), 1.4062 (1992), 1.4340 (1991), 1.3892 (1990),
  1.6359 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Switzerland, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,418 km total; 3,073 km are government owned and 1,345 km are
  nongovernment owned; the government network consists of 2,999 km
  1.435-meter standard gauge and 74 km 1.000-meter narrow gauge track;
  1,432 km double track, 99% electrified; the nongovernment network
  consists of 510 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, and 835 km 1.000-meter
  gauge, 100% electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  71,106 km 
paved: 
  71,106 km (including 1,502 km of expressways)
Inland waterways: 
  65 km; Rhine (Basel to Rheinfelden, Schaffhausen to Bodensee); 12
  navigable lakes
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 314 km; natural gas 1,506 km 
Ports: 
  Basel (river port)
Merchant marine: 
  23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 337,455 GRT/592,213 DWT, bulk
  10, cargo 4, chemical tanker 5, oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo
  2, specialized tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  70 
usable: 
  69 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  42 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  18 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent domestic, international, and broadcast services; 5,890,000
  telephones; extensive cable and microwave networks; broadcast stations
  - 7 AM, 265 FM, 18 (1,322 repeaters) TV; communications satellite
  earth station operating in the INTELSAT (Atlantic Ocean and Indian
  Ocean) system

@Switzerland, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (Air Force is part of the Army), Frontier Guards, Fortification
  Guards 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,853,075; fit for military service 1,589,288; reach
  military age (20) annually 43,005 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $3.4 billion, 1.7% of GDP (1993)


@Syria, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, along the Mediterranean Sea, between Turkey and Lebanon
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  185,180 sq km 
land area: 
  184,050 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than North Dakota
note: 
  includes 1,295 sq km of Israeli-occupied territory
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,253 km, Iraq 605 km, Israel 76 km, Jordan 375 km, Lebanon 375
  km, Turkey 822 km 
Coastline: 
  193 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  41 nm
territorial sea: 
  35 nm
International disputes: 
  separated from Israel by the 1949 Armistice Line; Golan Heights is
  Israeli occupied; Hatay question with Turkey; periodic disputes with
  Iraq over Euphrates water rights; ongoing dispute over water
  development plans by Turkey for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers;
  Syrian troops in northern Lebanon since October 1976
Climate: 
  mostly desert; hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August) and mild,
  rainy winters (December to February) along coast
Terrain: 
  primarily semiarid and desert plateau; narrow coastal plain; mountains
  in west
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, phosphates, chrome and manganese ores, asphalt, iron ore,
  rock salt, marble, gypsum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  28% 
permanent crops: 
  3% 
meadows and pastures: 
  46% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  20% 
Irrigated land: 
  6,700 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification; water
  pollution from dumping of untreated sewage and wastes from petroleum
  refining; lack of safe drinking water
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Environmental
  Modification
Note: 
  there are 40 Jewish settlements and civilian land use sites in the
  Israeli-occupied Golan Heights (April 1994)

@Syria, People

Population: 
  14,886,672 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  in addition, there are 30,500 people living in the Israeli-occupied
  Golan Heights--16,500 Arabs (15,000 Druze and 1,500 Alawites) and
  14,000 Jewish settlers (1994 est.)
Population growth rate: 
  3.74% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.65 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.25 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  42.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  66.46 years 
male: 
  65.37 years 
female: 
  67.61 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.65 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Syrian(s) 
adjective: 
  Syrian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab 90.3%, Kurds, Armenians, and other 9.7% 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 74%, Alawite, Druze, and other Muslim sects 16%,
  Christian (various sects) 10%, Jewish (tiny communities in Damascus,
  Al Qamishli, and Aleppo)
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), Kurdish, Armenian, Aramaic, Circassian, French
  widely understood
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  64% 
male: 
  78% 
female: 
  51% 
Labor force: 
  2.951 million (1989)
by occupation: 
  miscellaneous and government services 36%, agriculture 32%, industry
  and construction 32%; note - shortage of skilled labor (1984)

@Syria, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Syrian Arab Republic 
conventional short form: 
  Syria 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah 
local short form: 
  Suriyah 
former: 
  United Arab Republic (with Egypt) 
Digraph: 
  SY
Type: 
  republic under leftwing military regime since March 1963
Capital: 
  Damascus 
Administrative divisions: 
  14 provinces (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Hasakah, Al
  Ladhiqiyah, Al Qunaytirah, Ar Raqqah, As Suwayda', Dar'a, Dayr az
  Zawr, Dimashq, Halab, Hamah, Hims, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Tartus
Independence: 
  17 April 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under French
  administration)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 17 April (1946) 
Constitution: 
  13 March 1973
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law and civil law system; special religious courts;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Hafiz al-ASAD (since 22 February 1971 see note); Vice
  Presidents 'Abd al-Halim ibn Said KHADDAM, Rif'at al-ASAD, and
  Muhammad Zuhayr MASHARIQA (since 11 March 1984); election last held 2
  December 1991 (next to be held December 1998); results - President
  Hafiz al-ASAD was reelected for a fourth seven-year term with 99.98%
  of the vote; note - President ASAD seized power in the November 1970
  coup, assumed presidential powers 22 February 1971, and was confirmed
  as president in the 12 March 1971 national elections
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Mahmud ZU'BI (since 1 November 1987); Deputy Prime
  Minister Lt. Gen. Mustafa TALAS (since 11 March 1984); Deputy Prime
  Minister Salim YASIN (since NA December 1981); Deputy Prime Minister
  Rashid AKHTARINI (since 4 July 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
People's Council (Majlis al-Chaab): 
  elections last held 22-23 May 1990 (next to be held NA May 1994);
  results - Ba'th 53.6%, ASU 3.2%, SCP 3.2%, Arab Socialist Unionist
  Movement 2.8%, ASP 2%, Democratic Socialist Union Party 1.6%,
  independents 33.6%; seats - (250 total) Ba'th 134, ASU 8, SCP 8, Arab
  Socialist Unionist Movement 7, ASP 5, Democratic Socialist Union Party
  4, independents 84; note - the People's Council was expanded to 250
  seats total prior to the May 1990 election
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Constitutional Court, High Judicial Council, Court of
  Cassation, State Security Courts 
Political parties and leaders: 
  ruling party is the Arab Socialist Resurrectionist (Ba'th) Party; the
  Progressive National is dominated by Ba'thists but includes
  independents and members of the Syrian Arab Socialist Party (ASP);
  Arab Socialist Union (ASU); Syrian Communist Party (SCP); Arab
  Socialist Unionist Movement; and Democratic Socialist Union Party
Other political or pressure groups: 
  non-Ba'th parties have little effective political influence; Communist
  party ineffective; conservative religious leaders; Muslim Brotherhood
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL,
  IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNRWA, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Walid MUALEM 
chancery: 
  2215 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 232-6313 
FAX: 
  (202) 234-9548 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Christopher W. S. ROSS 
embassy: 
  Abou Roumaneh, Al-Mansur Street No. 2, Damascus 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 29, Damascus 
telephone: 
  [963] (11) 332-814, 332-315, 714-108, 330-788 
FAX: 
  [963] (11) 247-938 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black with two
  small green five-pointed stars in a horizontal line centered in the
  white band; similar to the flag of Yemen, which has a plain white band
  and of Iraq, which has three green stars (plus an Arabic inscription)
  in a horizontal line centered in the white band; also similar to the
  flag of Egypt, which has a symbolic eagle centered in the white band

@Syria, Economy

Overview: 
  Syria's state-dominated Ba'thist economy has benefited from the Gulf
  war of early 1991, increased oil production, good weather, and
  economic deregulation. Economic growth averaged roughly 10% in
  1990-93. The Gulf war provided Syria an aid windfall of nearly $5
  billion dollars from Arab, European, and Japanese donors. These
  inflows more than offset Damascus's war-related costs and will help
  Syria cover some of its debt arrears, restore suspended credit lines,
  and initiate selected military and civilian purchases. In 1992 the
  government spurred economic development by loosening controls on
  domestic and foreign investment while maintaining strict political
  controls. For the long run, Syria's economy is still saddled with a
  large number of poorly performing public sector firms, and industrial
  productivity remains to be improved. Another major long-term concern
  is the additional drain of upstream Euphrates water by Turkey when its
  vast dam and irrigation projects are completed by mid-decade.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $81.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,700 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  16.3% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  7.5% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $7.13 billion 
expenditures: 
  $9.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $4 billion (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum 53%, textiles 22%, cotton, fruits and vegetables
partners: 
  EC 48%, former CEMA countries 24%, Arab countries 18% (1991)
Imports: 
  $4.1 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs 21%, metal products 17%, machinery 15%
partners: 
  EC 37%, former CEMA countries 15%, US and Canada 10% (1991)
External debt: 
  $19.4 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 21% (1991); accounts for 19% of GDP, including petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,205,000 kW
production: 
  11.9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  830 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, food processing, beverages, tobacco, phosphate rock mining,
  petroleum
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 30% of GDP and one-third of labor force; all major crops
  (wheat, barley, cotton, lentils, chickpeas) grown mainly on
  rain-watered land causing wide swings in production; animal products -
  beef, lamb, eggs, poultry, milk; not self-sufficient in grain or
  livestock products
Illicit drugs: 
  a transit country for Lebanese and Turkish refined cocaine going to
  Europe and heroin and hashish bound for regional and Western markets
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  no US aid; aid from other countries (Western and Arab) totals $1.358
  billion (1993 est.); no Ex-Im, OPEC programs in place; almost $5
  billion in loans and grants from Arab and Western donors from 1990-92
  as a result of Gulf war stance
Currency: 
  1 Syrian pound (#S) = 100 piastres
Exchange rates: 
  Syrian pounds (#S) per US$1 - 11.2 (official fixed rate), 26.6
  (blended rate used by the UN and diplomatic missions), 42.0
  (neighboring country rate - applies to most state enterprise imports),
  46.0 - 53.0 (offshore rate) (yearend 1993)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Syria, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,998 km total; 1,766 km standard gauge, 232 km 1.050-meter (narrow)
  gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  29,000 km 
paved: 
  22,680 km (including 670 km of expressways) (1988)
unpaved: 
  6,320 km 
Inland waterways: 
  870 km; minimal economic importance
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,304 km; petroleum products 515 km 
Ports: 
  Tartus, Latakia, Baniyas, Jablah
Merchant marine: 
  57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 151,519 GRT/243,910 DWT, bulk 7,
  cargo 48, vehicle carrier 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  104 
usable: 
  100 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  24 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  21 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  3 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system currently undergoing significant improvement and digital
  upgrades, including fiber optic technology; 512,600 telephones (37
  telephones per 1,000 persons); broadcast stations - 9 AM, 1 FM, 17 TV;
  satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Intersputnik;
  1 submarine cable; coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Iraq,
  Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey

@Syria, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Syrian Arab Army, Syrian Arab Navy, Syrian Arab Air Force, Syrian Arab
  Air Defense Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 3,300,397; fit for military service 1,850,545; reach
  military age (19) annually 155,569 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $2.2 billion, 6% of GDP (1992)


@Taiwan, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Asia, off the southeastern coast of China, between Japan and
  the Philippines
Map references: 
  Asia, Oceania, Southeast Asia 
Area: 
total area: 
  35,980 sq km 
land area: 
  32,260 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland and Delaware combined
note: 
  includes the Pescadores, Matsu, and Quemoy
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  1,448 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  involved in complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with China,
  Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; Paracel Islands
  occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan;
  Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu Tai)
  claimed by China and Taiwan
Climate: 
  tropical; marine; rainy season during southwest monsoon (June to
  August); cloudiness is persistent and extensive all year
Terrain: 
  eastern two-thirds mostly rugged mountains; flat to gently rolling
  plains in west
Natural resources: 
  small deposits of coal, natural gas, limestone, marble, and asbestos 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  24% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  5% 
forest and woodland: 
  55% 
other: 
  15% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from industrial emissions, untreated sewage; air
  pollution; contamination of drinking water supplies
natural hazards: 
  subject to earthquakes and typhoons
international agreements: 
  signed, but not ratified - Marine Life Conservation

@Taiwan, People

Population: 
  21,298,930 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.96% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.6 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.63 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.38 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  5.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.25 years 
male: 
  72.01 years 
female: 
  78.66 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.81 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Chinese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Chinese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Taiwanese 84%, mainland Chinese 14%, aborigine 2% 
Religions: 
  mixture of Buddhist, Confucian, and Taoist 93%, Christian 4.5%, other
  2.5% 
Languages: 
  Mandarin Chinese (official), Taiwanese (Min), Hakka dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  86% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  79% 
Labor force: 
  7.9 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and commerce 53%, services 22%, agriculture 15.6%, civil
  administration 7% (1989)

@Taiwan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Taiwan 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  T'ai-wan 
Digraph: 
  TW
Type: 
  multiparty democratic regime; opposition political parties legalized
  in March, 1989
Capital: 
  Taipei 
Administrative divisions: 
  some of the ruling party in Taipei claim to be the government of all
  China; in keeping with that claim, the central administrative
  divisions include 2 provinces (sheng, singular and plural) and 2
  municipalities* (shih, singular and plural) - Fu-chien (some 20
  offshore islands of Fujian Province including Quemoy and Matsu),
  Kao-hsiung*, T'ai-pei*, and Taiwan (the island of Taiwan and the
  Pescadores islands); the more commonly referenced administrative
  divisions are those of Taiwan Province - 16 counties (hsien, singular
  and plural), 5 municipalities* (shih, singular and plural), and 2
  special municipalities** (chuan-shih, singular and plural); Chang-hua,
  Chia-i, Chia-i*, Chi-lung*, Hsin-chu, Hsin-chu*, Hua-lien, I-lan,
  Kao-hsiung, Kao-hsiung**, Miao-li, Nan-t'ou, P'eng-hu, P'ing-tung,
  T'ai-chung, T'ai-chung*, T'ai-nan, T'ai-nan*, T'ai-pei, T'ai-pei**,
  T'ai-tung, T'ao-yuan, and Yun-lin; the provincial capital is at
  Chung-hsing-hsin-ts'un
note: 
  Taiwan uses the Wade-Giles system for romanization
National holiday: 
  National Day, 10 October (1911) (Anniversary of the Revolution)
Constitution: 
  1 January 1947, amended in 1992, presently undergoing revision
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President LI Teng-hui (since 13 January 1988); Vice President LI
  Yuan-zu (since 20 May 1990) 
head of government: 
  Premier (President of the Executive Yuan) LIEN Chan (since 23 February
  1993); Vice Premier (Vice President of the Executive Yuan) HSU Li-teh
  (since 23 February 1993) presidential election last held 21 March 1990
  (next to be held NA March 1996); results - President LI Teng-hui was
  reelected by the National Assembly; vice presidential election last
  held 21 March 1990 (next election will probably be a direct popular
  election and will be held NA March 1996); results - LI Yuan-zu was
  elected by the National Assembly
cabinet: 
  Executive Yuan; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Legislative Yuan and unicameral National Assembly
Legislative Yuan: 
  elections last held 19 December 1992 (next to be held near the end of
  1995); results - KMT 60%, DPP 31%, independents 9%; seats - (304
  total, 161 elected) KMT 96, DPP 50, independents 15
National Assembly: 
  elections - first National Assembly elected in November 1946 with a
  supplementary election in December 1986; second and present National
  Assembly elected in December 1991; seats - (403 total) KMT 318, DPP
  75, other 10; (next election to be held in 1997)
Judicial branch: 
  Judicial Yuan 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Kuomintang (KMT, Nationalist Party), LI Teng-hui, chairman; Democratic
  Progressive Party (DPP); Chinese New Party (CNP); Labor Party (LP)
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Taiwan independence movement, various environmental groups
note: 
  debate on Taiwan independence has become acceptable within the
  mainstream of domestic politics on Taiwan; political liberalization
  and the increased representation of the opposition Democratic
  Progressive Party in Taiwan's legislature have opened public debate on
  the island's national identity; advocates of Taiwan independence, both
  within the DPP and the ruling Kuomintang, oppose the ruling party's
  traditional stand that the island will eventually unify with mainland
  China; the aims of the Taiwan independence movement include
  establishing a sovereign nation on Taiwan and entering the UN; other
  organizations supporting Taiwan independence include the World United
  Formosans for Independence and the Organization for Taiwan Nation
  Building
Member of: 
  expelled from UN General Assembly and Security Council on 25 October
  1971 and withdrew on same date from other charter-designated
  subsidiary organs; expelled from IMF/World Bank group April/May 1980;
  seeking to join GATT; attempting to retain membership in INTELSAT;
  suspended from IAEA in 1972, but still allows IAEA controls over
  extensive atomic development, APEC, AsDB, BCIE, ICC, IOC, COCOM
  (cooperating), WCL 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none; unofficial commercial and cultural relations with the people of
  the US are maintained through a private instrumentality, the
  Coordination Council for North American Affairs (CCNAA) with
  headquarters in Taipei and field offices in Washington and 10 other US
  cities
US diplomatic representation: 
  unofficial commercial and cultural relations with the people of Taiwan
  are maintained through a private institution, the American Institute
  in Taiwan (AIT), which has offices in Taipei at #7, Lane 134, Hsin Yi
  Road, Section 3, telephone [886] (2) 709-2000, and in Kao-hsiung at #2
  Chung Cheng 3d Road, telephone [886] (7) 224-0154 through 0157, and
  the American Trade Center at Room 3207 International Trade Building,
  Taipei World Trade Center, 333 Keelung Road Section 1, Taipei 10548,
  telephone [886] (2) 720-1550
Flag: 
  red with a dark blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side corner bearing
  a white sun with 12 triangular rays

@Taiwan, Economy

Overview: 
  Taiwan has a dynamic capitalist economy with considerable government
  guidance of investment and foreign trade and partial government
  ownership of some large banks and industrial firms. Real growth in GNP
  has averaged about 9% a year during the past three decades. Export
  growth has been even faster and has provided the impetus for
  industrialization. Agriculture contributes about 4% to GDP, down from
  35% in 1952. Taiwan currently ranks as number 13 among major trading
  countries. Traditional labor-intensive industries are steadily being
  replaced with more capital- and technology-intensive industries.
  Taiwan has become a major investor in China, Thailand, Indonesia, the
  Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam. The tightening of labor markets
  has led to an influx of foreign workers, both legal and illegal.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $224 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $10,600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.2% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  1.5% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $30.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $30.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $85 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  electrical machinery 19.7%, electronic products 19.6%, textiles 10.9%,
  footwear 3.3%, foodstuffs 1.0%, plywood and wood products 0.9% (1993
  est.)
partners: 
  US 27.6%, Hong Kong 21.7%, EC countries 15.2%, Japan 10.5% (1993 est.)
Imports: 
  $77.1 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment 15.7%, electronic products 15.6%, chemicals
  9.8%, iron and steel 8.5%, crude oil 3.9%, foodstuffs 2.1% (1993 est.)
partners: 
  Japan 30.1%, US 21.7%, EC countries 17.6% (1993 est.)
External debt: 
  $620 million (1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 3.6% (1993 est.); accounts for more than 40% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  18,382,000 kW
production: 
  98.5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  4,718 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  electronics, textiles, chemicals, clothing, food processing, plywood,
  sugar milling, cement, shipbuilding, petroleum refining
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 4% of GNP and 16% of labor force (includes part-time
  farmers); heavily subsidized sector; major crops - vegetables, rice,
  fruit, tea; livestock - hogs, poultry, beef, milk; not self-sufficient
  in wheat, soybeans, corn; fish catch increasing, reached 1.4 million
  metric tons in 1988
Illicit drugs: 
  an important heroin transit point; also a major drug money laundering
  center
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US, including Ex-Im (FY46-82), $4.6 billion; Western (non-US)
  countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $500 million 
Currency: 
  1 New Taiwan dollar (NT$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  New Taiwan dollars per US$1 - 26.6 (1993), 25.4 (1992), 25.748 (1991),
  27.108 (1990), 26.407 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Taiwan, Communications

Railroads: 
  about 4,600 km total track with 1,075 km common carrier lines and
  3,525 km industrial lines; common carrier lines consist of the
  1.067-meter gauge 708 km West Line and the 367 km East Line; a 98.25
  km South Link Line connection was completed in late 1991; common
  carrier lines owned by the government and operated by the Railway
  Administration under Ministry of Communications; industrial lines
  owned and operated by government enterprises
Highways: 
total: 
  20,041 km 
paved: 
  bituminous, concrete pavement 17,095 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel 2,371 km; graded earth 575 km 
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 615 km; natural gas 97 km 
Ports: 
  Kao-hsiung, Chi-lung (Keelung), Hua-lien, Su-ao, T'ai-tung
Merchant marine: 
  212 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,910,453 GRT/9,098,315 DWT,
  bulk 54, cargo 38, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk 2, combination
  ore/oil 2, container 85, oil tanker 17, passenger-cargo 1,
  refrigerated cargo 11, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  40 
usable: 
  38 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  36 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  16 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  7 
Telecommunications: 
  best developed system in Asia outside of Japan; 7,800,000 telephones;
  extensive microwave radio relay links on east and west coasts;
  broadcast stations - 91 AM, 23 FM, 15 TV (13 repeaters); 8,620,000
  radios; 6,386,000 TVs (5,680,000 color, 706,000 monochrome); satellite
  earth stations - 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT;
  submarine cable links to Japan (Okinawa), Philippines, Guam,
  Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Australia, Middle East, and Western
  Europe

@Taiwan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Marines), Air Force, Coastal Patrol and Defense
  Command, Armed Forces Reserve Command, Military Police Command 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,205,707; fit for military service 4,806,456; reach
  military age (19) annually 192,083 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $12.1 billion, 5% of GNP (FY93/94 est.)


@Tajikistan, Geography

Location: 
  Central Asia, between Uzbekistan and China
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian States,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  143,100 sq km 
land area: 
  142,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Wisconsin
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,651 km, Afghanistan 1,206 km, China 414 km, Kyrgyzstan 870 km,
  Uzbekistan 1,161 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  boundary with China in dispute; territorial dispute with Kyrgyzstan on
  northern boundary in Isfara Valley area; Afghanistan's and other
  foreign support to Tajik rebels based in northern Afghanistan
Climate: 
  midlatitude continental, hot summers, mild winters; semiarid to polar
  in Pamir Mountains
Terrain: 
  Pamir and Alay Mountains dominate landscape; western Fergana Valley in
  north, Kofarnihon and Vakhsh Valleys in southwest
Natural resources: 
  significant hydropower potential, some petroleum, uranium, mercury,
  brown coal, lead, zinc, antimony, tungsten 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  23% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  71% 
Irrigated land: 
  6,940 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  inadequate sanitation facilities; increasing levels of soil salinity;
  industrial pollution; excessive pesticides; Tajikistan is part of the
  basin of the shrinking Aral Sea which suffers from severe
  overutilization of available water for irrigation and associated
  pollution
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  landlocked

@Tajikistan, People

Population: 
  5,995,469 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.67% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  34.79 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.71 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.43 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  62 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.76 years 
male: 
  65.88 years 
female: 
  71.79 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.62 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Tajik(s) 
adjective: 
  Tajik 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Tajik 64.9%, Uzbek 25%, Russian 3.5% (declining because of
  emigration), other 6.6% 
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 80%, Shi'a Muslim 5% 
Languages: 
  Tajik (official), Russian widely used in government and business
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  99% 
Labor force: 
  1.95 million (1992)
by occupation: 
  agriculture and forestry 43%, government and services 24%, industry
  14%, trade and communications 11%, construction 8% (1990)

@Tajikistan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Tajikistan 
conventional short form: 
  Tajikistan 
local long form: 
  Respublika i Tojikiston 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  TI
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Dushanbe 
Administrative divisions: 
  2 oblasts (viloyotho, singular - viloyat) and one autonomous oblast*
  (viloyati avtonomii); Viloyati Avtonomii Badakhshoni Kuni* (Khorugh -
  formerly Khorog), Viloyati Khatlon (Qurghonteppa - formerly
  Kurgan-Tyube), Viloyati Leninobad (Khujand - formerly Leninabad)
note: 
  the administrative center names are in parentheses
Independence: 
  9 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 9 September (1991) 
Constitution: 
  a referendum on new constitution planned for June 1994
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; no judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Head of State and Assembly Chairman Emomili RAKHMONOV (since NA
  November 1992); election last held 27 October 1991 (next to be held NA
  September 1994); results - Rakhman NABIYEV, Communist Party 60%;
  Davlat KHUDONAZAROV, Democratic Party, Islamic Rebirth Party and
  Rastokhoz Party 30%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Abdujalil SAMADOV (since 27 December 993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
note: 
  the presidency was abolished in November 1992, when RAKHMANOV became
  head of state; a referendum on presidential or parliamentary system is
  planned for June 1994
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme Soviet: 
  elections last held 25 February 1990 (next to be held NA September
  1994); results - Communist Party 99%, other 1%; seats - (230 total)
  Communist Party 227, other 3
Judicial branch: 
  Prosecutor General 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Communist Party (Tajik Socialist Party - TSP), Shodi SHABDOLOV,
  chairman; Tajik Democratic Party (TDP), Shodmon YUSUF; Islamic Revival
  Party (IRP), Mohammed Sharif HIMOTZODA, Davat OUSMAN; Rastokhez
  Movement, Tohir ABDUJABBAR; Lali Badakhshan Society, Atobek AMIRBEK
note: 
  all the above-listed parties but the Communist Party were banned in
  June 1993
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Tajikistan Opposition Movement based in northern Afghanistan
Member of: 
  CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECO, ESCAP, IBRD, IDA, IDB, IMF, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), IOC, NACC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, WHO,
  WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  NA 
chancery: 
  NA 
telephone: 
  NA 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Stanley T. ESCUDERO 
embassy: 
  Hotel October, 105A Rudaki Prospect, Dushanbe 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [7] (3772) 21-03-56 and 21-03-60 
Flag: 
  three horizontal stripes of red (top), a wider stripe of white, and
  green; a crown surmounted by seven five-pointed stars is located in
  the center of the white stripe

@Tajikistan, Economy

Overview: 
  Tajikistan had the lowest per capita GDP in the former USSR, the
  highest rate of population growth, and the lowest standard of living.
  Its economy at the start of 1994 is producing at roughly the 1989
  level and faces urgent reconstruction tasks from the 1992 civil war.
  Tajikistan's economy was severely disrupted by the breakup of the
  Soviet economy, which provided guaranteed trade relations and heavy
  subsidies and in which specialized tasks were assigned to each
  republic. Its economy is highly agricultural (43% of the work force);
  it has specialized in growing cotton for export and must import a
  large share of its food. Its industry (14% of the work force) produces
  aluminum, hydropower, machinery, and household appliances. Nearly all
  petroleum products must be imported. Constant political turmoil and
  continued dominance of former Communist officials have slowed the
  process of economic reform and brought near economic collapse while
  limiting foreign assistance. Tajikistan is in the midst of a prolonged
  monetary crisis in which it is attempting to continue to use the
  Russian ruble as its currency while its neighbors have switched to new
  independent currencies; Russia is unwilling to advance sufficient
  rubles without attaching stringent reform conditions.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6.9 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Tajik statistics, which are very
  uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -21% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,180 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  38% per month (1993 average)
Unemployment rate: 
  1.1% includes only officially registered unemployed; also large
  numbers of underemployed workers and unregistered unemployed people
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $263 million to outside the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  cotton, aluminum, fruits, vegetable oil, textiles
partners: 
  Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan
Imports: 
  $371 million from outside the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  fuel, chemicals, machinery and transport equipment, textiles,
  foodstuffs
partners: 
  Russia, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -20% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  4,585,000 kW
production: 
  16.8 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,879 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  aluminum, zinc, lead, chemicals and fertilizers, cement, vegetable
  oil, metal-cutting machine tools, refrigerators and freezers
Agriculture: 
  cotton, grain, fruits, grapes, vegetables; cattle, sheep and goats
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for CIS
  consumption; limited government eradication programs; used as
  transshipment points for illicit drugs from Southwest Asia to Western
  Europe and North America
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Russia reportedly provided substantial general assistance throughout
  1993 and continues to provide assistance in 1994; Western aid and
  credits promised through the end of 1993 were $700 million but
  disbursements were only $104 million; large scale development loans
  await IMF approval of a reform and stabilization plan
Currency: 
  1 ruble (R) = 100 kopeks; acquiring new Russian rubles as currency
  under December 1993 agreement
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Tajikistan, Communications

Railroads: 
  480 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  29,900 km 
paved: 
  21,400 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 8,500 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  natural gas 400 km (1992)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  58 
usable: 
  30 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  13 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  poorly developed and not well maintained; many towns are not reached
  by the national network; 303,000 telephone circuits (December 1991);
  telephone density about 55 per 1000 persons(1951); linked by cable and
  microwave to other CIS republics, and by leased connections to the
  Moscow international gateway switch; Dushanbe linked by INTELSAT to
  international gateway switch in Ankara; satellite earth stations - 1
  Orbita and 2 INTELSAT (one INTELSAT earth station provides TV
  receive-only service from Turkey)

@Tajikistan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army (being formed), National Guard, Security Forces (internal and
  border troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,361,143; fit for military service 1,116,246; reach
  military age (18) annually 57,681 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Tanzania, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean between Kenya and
  Mozambique
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  945,090 sq km 
land area: 
  886,040 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than twice the size of California
note: 
  includes the islands of Mafia, Pemba, and Zanzibar
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,402 km, Burundi 451 km, Kenya 769 km, Malawi 475 km,
  Mozambique 756 km, Rwanda 217 km, Uganda 396 km, Zambia 338 km 
Coastline: 
  1,424 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  boundary dispute with Malawi in Lake Nyasa; Tanzania-Zaire-Zambia
  tripoint in Lake Tanganyika may no longer be indefinite since it is
  reported that the indefinite section of the Zaire-Zambia boundary has
  been settled
Climate: 
  varies from tropical along coast to temperate in highlands
Terrain: 
  plains along coast; central plateau; highlands in north, south
Natural resources: 
  hydropower potential, tin, phosphates, iron ore, coal, diamonds,
  gemstones, gold, natural gas, nickel 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  40% 
forest and woodland: 
  47% 
other: 
  7% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,530 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil degradation; deforestation; desertification; destruction of coral
  reefs threatens marine habitats; recent droughts affected marginal
  agriculture
natural hazards: 
  the tsetse fly and lack of water limit agriculture; flooding on the
  central plateau during the rainy season
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  Mount Kilimanjaro is highest point in Africa

@Tanzania, People

Population: 
  27,985,660 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.5% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.48 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  19.42 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  109.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  43.25 years 
male: 
  41.52 years 
female: 
  45.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.2 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Tanzanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Tanzanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
mainland: 
  native African 99% (consisting of well over 100 tribes)
  Asian, European, and Arab 1% 
Zanzibar: 
  NA
Religions: 
mainland: 
  Christian 45%, Muslim 35%, indigenous beliefs 20% 
Zanzibar: 
  Muslim 99% plus
Languages: 
  Swahili (official; widely understood and generally used for
  communication between ethnic groups and is used in primary education),
  English (official; primary language of commerce, administration, and
  higher education)
note: 
  first language of most people is one of the local languages
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1978)
total population: 
  46% 
male: 
  62% 
female: 
  31% 
Labor force: 
  732,200 wage earners
by occupation: 
  agriculture 90%, industry and commerce 10% (1986 est.)

@Tanzania, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  United Republic of Tanzania 
conventional short form: 
  Tanzania 
former: 
  United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar 
Digraph: 
  TZ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Dar es Salaam 
note: 
  some government offices have been transferred to Dodoma, which is
  planned as the new national capital by the end of the 1990s
Administrative divisions: 
  25 regions; Arusha, Dar es Salaam, Dodoma, Iringa, Kigoma,
  Kilimanjaro, Lindi, Mara, Mbeya, Morogoro, Mtwara, Mwanza, Pemba
  North, Pemba South, Pwani, Rukwa, Ruvuma, Shinyanga, Singida, Tabora,
  Tanga, Zanzibar Central/South, Zanzibar North, Zanzibar Urban/West,
  Ziwa Magharibi
Independence: 
  26 April 1964; Tanganyika became independent 9 December 1961 (from UN
  trusteeship under British administration); Zanzibar became independent
  19 December 1963 (from UK); Tanganyika united with Zanzibar 26 April
  1964 to form the United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar; renamed
  United Republic of Tanzania 29 October 1964
National holiday: 
  Union Day, 26 April (1964) 
Constitution: 
  25 April 1977; major revisions October 1984
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; judicial review of legislative acts
  limited to matters of interpretation; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Ali Hassan MWINYI (since 5 November 1985); First Vice
  President John MALECELA (since 9 November 1990); Second Vice President
  and President of Zanzibar Salmin AMOUR (since 9 November 1990)
  election last held 28 October 1990 (next to be held NA October 1995);
  results - Ali Hassan MWINYI was elected without opposition
head of government: 
  Prime Minister John MALECELA (since 9 November 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from the National Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Bunge): 
  elections last held 28 October 1990 (next to be held NA October 1995);
  results - CCM was the only party; seats - (241 total, 168 elected) CCM
  168
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM or Revolutionary Party), Ali Hassan MWINYI;
  Civic United Front (CUF), James MAPALALA; National Committee for
  Constitutional Reform (NCCK), Mabere MARANDO; Union for Multiparty
  Democracy (UMD), Abdullah FUNDIKIRA; Chama Cha Demokrasia na Maendeleo
  (CHADEMA), Edwin I. M. MTEI, chairman
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB, ECA, FAO, FLS, G-6, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO,
  ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Charles Musama NYIRABU 
chancery: 
  2139 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 939-6125 
FAX: 
  (202) 797-7408 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Peter Jon DE VOS 
embassy: 
  36 Laibon Road (off Bagamoyo Road), Dar es Salaam 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 9123, Dar es Salaam 
telephone: 
  [255] (51) 66010 through 13 
FAX: 
  [255] (51) 66701 
Flag: 
  divided diagonally by a yellow-edged black band from the lower
  hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is green and the
  lower triangle is blue

@Tanzania, Economy

Overview: 
  Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the world. The economy is
  heavily dependent on agriculture, which accounts for about 58% of GDP,
  provides 85% of exports, and employs 90% of the work force. Industry
  accounts for 8% of GDP and is mainly limited to processing
  agricultural products and light consumer goods. The economic recovery
  program announced in mid-1986 has generated notable increases in
  agricultural production and financial support for the program by
  bilateral donors. The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and
  bilateral donors have provided funds to rehabilitate Tanzania's
  deteriorated economic infrastructure. Growth in 1991-93 featured a
  pickup in industrial production and a substantial increase in output
  of minerals led by gold.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $16.7 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $600 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  21% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $495 million 
expenditures: 
  $631 million, including capital expenditures of $118 million (1990
  est.)
Exports: 
  $418 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  coffee, cotton, tobacco, tea, cashew nuts, sisal
partners: 
  FRG, UK, Japan, Netherlands, Kenya, Hong Kong, US
Imports: 
  $1.51 billion (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, machinery and transportation equipment, cotton
  piece goods, crude oil, foodstuffs
partners: 
  FRG, UK, US, Japan, Italy, Denmark
External debt: 
  $6.44 billion (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 9.3% (1990); accounts for 8% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  405,000 kW
production: 
  600 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  20 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  primarily agricultural processing (sugar, beer, cigarettes, sisal
  twine), diamond and gold mining, oil refinery, shoes, cement,
  textiles, wood products, fertilizer
Agriculture: 
  accounts for over 58% of GDP; topography and climatic conditions limit
  cultivated crops to only 5% of land area; cash crops - coffee, sisal,
  tea, cotton, pyrethrum (insecticide made from chrysanthemums),
  cashews, tobacco, cloves (Zanzibar); food crops - corn, wheat,
  cassava, bananas, fruits, vegetables; small numbers of cattle, sheep,
  and goats; not self-sufficient in food grain production
Illicit drugs: 
  growing role in transshipment of Southwest Asian heroin destined for
  US and European markets
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $400 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $9.8
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $44 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $614 million 
Currency: 
  1 Tanzanian shilling (TSh) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Tanzanian shillings (TSh) per US$1 - 486.75 (January 1994), 405.27
  (1993), 297.71 (1992), 219.16 (1991), 195.06 (1990), 143.38 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July-30 June

@Tanzania, Communications

Railroads: 
  969 km total; all of 1.067-meter gauge; connects with Zambia railroad
  at Tazara
Highways: 
total: 
  81,900 km 
paved: 
  3,600 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 5,600 km; improved, unimproved earth 72,700 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Lake Tanganyika, Lake Victoria, Lake Nyasa
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 982 km 
Ports: 
  Dar es Salaam, Mtwara, Tanga, and Zanzibar are ocean ports; Mwanza on
  Lake Victoria and Kigoma on Lake Tanganyika are inland ports
Merchant marine: 
  7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 29,145 GRT/39,186 DWT, cargo 3,
  oil tanker 1, passenger-cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  109 
usable: 
  100 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  12 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  40 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system operating below capacity; open wire, radio relay, and
  troposcatter; 103,800 telephones; broadcast stations - 12 AM, 4 FM, 2
  TV; 1 Indian Ocean and 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Tanzania, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Tanzanian People's Defense Force (TPDF; including Army, Navy, and Air
  Force), paramilitary Police Field Force Unit, Militia 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,011,564; fit for military service 3,480,179 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Thailand, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand, between Burma and
  Cambodia
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  514,000 sq km 
land area: 
  511,770 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of Wyoming
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,863 km, Burma 1,800 km, Cambodia 803 km, Laos 1,754 km,
  Malaysia 506 km 
Coastline: 
  3,219 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  boundary dispute with Laos; unresolved maritime boundary with Vietnam;
  parts of border with Thailand in dispute; maritime boundary with
  Thailand not clearly defined
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy, warm, cloudy southwest monsoon (mid-May to
  September); dry, cool northeast monsoon (November to mid-March);
  southern isthmus always hot and humid
Terrain: 
  central plain; Khorat plateau in the east; mountains elsewhere
Natural resources: 
  tin, rubber, natural gas, tungsten, tantalum, timber, lead, fish,
  gypsum, lignite, fluorite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  34% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  30% 
other: 
  31% 
Irrigated land: 
  42,300 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution increasing from vehicle emissions; water pollution from
  organic and factory wastes; deforestation; wildlife populations
  threatened by illegal hunting
natural hazards: 
  land subsidence in Bangkok area resulting from the depletion of the
  water table
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Life Conservaiton, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified
  - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  controls only land route from Asia to Malaysia and Singapore

@Thailand, People

Population: 
  59,510,471 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.3% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.43 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.41 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  37.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.35 years 
male: 
  64.99 years 
female: 
  71.87 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.1 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Thai (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Thai 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Thai 75%, Chinese 14%, other 11% 
Religions: 
  Buddhism 95%, Muslim 3.8%, Christianity 0.5%, Hinduism 0.1%, other
  0.6% (1991)
Languages: 
  Thai, English the secondary language of the elite, ethnic and regional
  dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  93% 
male: 
  96% 
female: 
  90% 
Labor force: 
  30.87 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 62%, industry 13%, commerce 11%, services (including
  government) 14% (1989 est.)

@Thailand, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Thailand 
conventional short form: 
  Thailand 
Digraph: 
  TH
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Bangkok 
Administrative divisions: 
  73 provinces (changwat, singular and plural); Ang Thong, Buriram,
  Chachoengsao, Chai Nat, Chaiyaphum, Chanthaburi, Chiang Mai, Chiang
  Rai, Chon Buri, Chumphon, Kalasin, Kamphaeng Phet, Kanchanaburi, Khon
  Kaen, Krabi, Krung Thep Mahanakhon, Lampang, Lamphun, Loei, Lop Buri,
  Mae Hong Son, Maha Sarakham, Mukdahan, Nakhon Nayok, Nakhon Pathom,
  Nakhon Phanom, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat,
  Nan, Narathiwat, Nong Khai, Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani, Pattani,
  Phangnga, Phatthalung, Phayao, Phetchabun, Phetchaburi, Phichit,
  Phitsanulok, Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Phrae, Phuket, Prachin Buri,
  Prachuap Khiri Khan, Ranong, Ratchaburi, Rayong, Roi Et, Sakon Nakhon,
  Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon, Samut Songkhram, Sara Buri, Satun, Sing
  Buri, Sisaket, Songkhla, Sukhothai, Suphan Buri, Surat Thani, Surin,
  Tak, Trang, Trat, Ubon Ratchathani, Udon Thani, Uthai Thani,
  Uttaradit, Yala, Yasothon
Independence: 
  1238 (traditional founding date; never colonized)
National holiday: 
  Birthday of His Majesty the King, 5 December (1927) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution approved 7 December 1991; amended 10 June 1992
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system, with influences of common law; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; martial law in effect since 23
  February 1991 military coup
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King PHUMIPHON Adunyadet (since 9 June 1946); Heir Apparent Crown
  Prince WACHIRALONGKON (born 28 July 1952) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister CHUAN Likphai (since 23 September 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Privy Council: 
  NA 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral National Assembly (Rathasatha)
Senate (Vuthisatha): 
  consists of a 270-member appointed body
House of Representatives(Saphaphoothan-Rajsadhorn): 
  elections last held 13 September 1992 (next to be held by NA); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (360 total) DP 79, TNP 77, NDP
  60, NAP 51, Phalang Tham 47, SAP 22, LDP 8, SP 8, Mass Party 4, Thai
  Citizen's Party 3, People's Party 1, People's Force Party 0
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Sarndika) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democrat Party (DP), Chuan LIKPHAI; Thai Nation Pary (TNP or Chat Thai
  Party), Banhan SINLAPA-ACHA; National Development Party (NDP or Chat
  Phattana), Chatchai CHUNHAWAN; New Aspiration Party (NAP), Gen.
  Chawalit YONGCHAIYUT; Phalang Tham (Palang Dharma), Bunchu
  ROTCHANASATIEN; Social Action Party (SAP), Montri PHONGPHANIT; Liberal
  Democratic Party (LDP or Seri Tham), Athit URAIRAT; Solidarity Party
  (SP), Uthai PHIMCHAICHON; Mass Party (Muanchon), Pol. Cpt. Choem
  YUBAMRUNG; Thai Citizen's Party (Prachakon Thai), Samak SUNTHONWET;
  People's Party (Ratsadon), Chaiphak SIRIWAT; People's Force Party
  (Phalang Prachachon), Col. Sophon HANCHAREON
Member of: 
  APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM (observer), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNTAC, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador PHIRAPHONG Kasemsi 
chancery: 
  2300 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 483-7200 
FAX: 
  (202) 234-4498 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador David F. LAMBERTSON 
embassy: 
  95 Wireless Road, Bangkok 
mailing address: 
  APO AP 96546 
telephone: 
  [66] (2) 252-5040 
FAX: 
  [66] (2) 254-2990 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chiang Mai 
consulate(s): 
  Udorn (Udon Thani) 
Flag: 
  five horizontal bands of red (top), white, blue (double width), white,
  and red

@Thailand, Economy

Overview: 
  Thailand's economy recovered rapidly from the political unrest in May
  1992 to post an impressive 7.5% growth rate for the year and 7.8% in
  1993. One of the more advanced developing countries in Asia, Thailand
  depends on exports of manufactures and the development of the service
  sector to fuel the country's rapid growth. The trade and current
  account deficits fell in 1992; much of Thailand's recent imports have
  been for capital equipment suggesting that the export sector is poised
  for further growth. With foreign investment slowing, Bangkok is
  working to increase the generation of domestic capital. Prime Minister
  CHUAN's government - Thailand's fifth government in less than two
  years - is pledged to continue Bangkok's probusiness policies, and the
  return of a democratically elected government has improved business
  confidence. Nevertheless, CHUAN must overcome divisions within his
  ruling coalition to complete much needed infrastructure development
  programs if Thailand is to remain an attractive place for business
  investment. Over the longer-term, Bangkok must produce more college
  graduates with technical training and upgrade workers' skills to
  continue its rapid economic development.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $323 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.8% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.1% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  3.1% (1992 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $21.36 billion 
expenditures: 
  $22.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $6.24 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $28.4 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery and manufactures 76.9%, agricultural products 14.9%,
  fisheries products 5.9% (1992)
partners: 
  US 22%, Japan 18%, Singapore 8%, Hong Kong 5%, Germany 4%, Netherlands
  4%, UK 4%, Malaysia, France, China (1992)
Imports: 
  $37.6 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  capital goods 41.4%, intermediate goods and raw materials 32.8%,
  consumer goods 10.4%, oil 8.2%
partners: 
  Japan 29.3%, US 11.4%, Singapore 7.6%, Taiwan 5.5%, Germany 5.4%,
  South Korea 4.6%, Malaysia 4.2%, China 3.3%, Hong Kong 3.3%, UK (1992)
External debt: 
  $33.4 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 9% (1992); accounts for about 26% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  10,000,000 kW
production: 
  43.75 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  760 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism is the largest source of foreign exchange; textiles and
  garments, agricultural processing, beverages, tobacco, cement, light
  manufacturing, such as jewelry; electric appliances and components,
  integrated circuits, furniture, plastics; world's second-largest
  tungsten producer and third-largest tin producer
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 12% of GDP and 60% of labor force; leading producer and
  exporter of rice and cassava (tapioca); other crops - rubber, corn,
  sugarcane, coconuts, soybeans; except for wheat, self-sufficient in
  food
Illicit drugs: 
  a minor producer of opium and marijuana; major illicit trafficker of
  heroin, particularly from Burma and Laos, for the international drug
  market; eradication efforts have reduced the area of cannabis
  cultivation and shifted some production to neighboring countries;
  opium poppy cultivation has been affected by eradication efforts; also
  a major drug money laundering center
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $870 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $8.6
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $19 million 
Currency: 
  1 baht (B) = 100 satang
Exchange rates: 
  baht (B) per US$1 - 25.446 (December 1993), 25.400 (1992), 25.517
  (1991), 25.585 (1990), 25.702 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 October-30 September

@Thailand, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,940 km 1.000-meter gauge, 99 km double track
Highways: 
total: 
  77,697 km 
paved: 
  35,855 km (including 88 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  gravel, other stabilization 14,092 km; earth 27,750 km (1988)
Inland waterways: 
  3,999 km principal waterways; 3,701 km with navigable depths of 0.9 m
  or more throughout the year; numerous minor waterways navigable by
  shallow-draft native craft
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 67 km; natural gas 350 km 
Ports: 
  Bangkok, Pattani, Phuket, Sattahip, Si Racha
Merchant marine: 
  198 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 998,372 GRT/1,561,824 DWT, bulk
  14, cargo 105, chemical tanker 2, combination bulk 2, container 13,
  liquefied gas 9, oil tanker 43, passenger 1, refrigerated cargo 6,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea passenger 1, specialized tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  105 
usable: 
  96 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  51 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  14 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  28 
Telecommunications: 
  service to general public inadequate; bulk of service to government
  activities provided by multichannel cable and microwave radio relay
  network; 739,500 telephones (1987); broadcast stations - over 200 AM,
  100 FM, and 11 TV in government-controlled networks; satellite earth
  stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT;
  domestic satellite system being developed

@Thailand, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy (including Royal Thai Marine Corps),
  Royal Thai Air Force, Paramilitary Forces 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 16,982,226; fit for military service 10,312,744; reach
  military age (18) annually 599,240 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $3.8 billion, 2.9% of GNP (FY93/94 est.)


@The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, between Serbia and Montenegro and
  Greece
Map references: 
  Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones of the
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  25,333 sq km 
land area: 
  24,856 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Vermont
Land boundaries: 
  total 748 km, Albania 151 km, Bulgaria 148 km, Greece 228 km, Serbia
  and Montenegro 221 km (all with Serbia)
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Greece claims republic's name implies territorial claims against
  Aegean Macedonia
Climate: 
  hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively cold winters with heavy
  snowfall
Terrain: 
  mountainous territory covered with deep basins and valleys; there are
  three large lakes, each divided by a frontier line
Natural resources: 
  chromium, lead, zinc, manganese, tungsten, nickel, low-grade iron ore,
  asbestos, sulphur, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  30% 
other: 
  40% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution from metallurgical plants
natural hazards: 
  high seismic risks
international agreements: 
  party to - Ozone Layer Protection
Note: 
  landlocked; major transportation corridor from Western and Central
  Europe to Aegean Sea and Southern Europe to Western Europe

@The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, People

Population: 
  2,213,785 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.89% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.59 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.72 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.59 years 
male: 
  71.51 years 
female: 
  75.85 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.98 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Macedonian(s) 
adjective: 
  Macedonian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Macedonian 65%, Albanian 22%, Turkish 4%, Serb 2%, Gypsies 3%, other
  4% 
Religions: 
  Eastern Orthodox 67%, Muslim 30%, other 3% 
Languages: 
  Macedonian 70%, Albanian 21%, Turkish 3%, Serbo-Croatian 3%, other 3% 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  507,324 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 8%, manufacturing and mining 40% (1990)

@The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
conventional short form: 
  none 
local long form: 
  Republika Makedonija 
local short form: 
  Makedonija 
Abbreviation: 
  F.Y.R.O.M. 
Digraph: 
  MK
Type: 
  emerging democracy 
Capital: 
  Skopje 
Administrative divisions: 
  34 counties (opstinas, singular - opstina) Berovo, Bitola, Brod,
  Debar, Delcevo, Gevgelija, Gostivar, Kavadarci, Kicevo, Kocani,
  Kratovo, Kriva Palanka, Krusevo, Kumanovo, Murgasevo, Negotino, Ohrid,
  Prilep, Probistip, Radovis, Resen, Skopje-Centar, Skopje-Cair,
  Skopje-Karpos, Skopje-Kisela Voda, Skopje-Gazi Baba, Stip, Struga,
  Strumica, Sveti Nikole, Tetovo, Titov Veles, Valandovo, Vinica
Independence: 
  17 September 1991 (from Yugoslavia)
National holiday: 
  NA
Constitution: 
  adopted 17 November 1991, effective 20 November 1991
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Kiro GLIGOROV (since 27 January 1991); election last held 27
  January 1991 (next to be held NA); results - Kiro GLIGOROV was elected
  by the Assembly
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Branko CRVENKOVSKI (since 4 September 1992), Deputy
  Prime Ministers Jovan ANDONOV (since NA March 1991), Risto IVANOV
  (since NA), and Becir ZUTA (since NA March 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; elected by the majority vote of all the deputies
  in the Sobranje
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Assembly (Sobranje): 
  elections last held 11 and 25 November and 9 December 1990 (next to be
  held November 1994); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats -
  (120 total) VMRO-DPMNE 32, SDSM 29, PDPM 23, SRSM 19, SPM 4, DP 4, SJM
  2, others 7
Judicial branch: 
  Constitutional Court, Judicial Court of the Republic 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Social-Democratic Alliance of Macedonia (SDSM; former Communist
  Party), Branko CRVENKOVSKI, president; Party for Democratic Prosperity
  (PDPM); National Democratic Party (PDP), Ilijas HALINI, president;
  Alliance of Reform Forces of Macedonia - Liberal Party (SRSM-LP),
  Stojan ANDOV, president; Socialist Party of Macedonia (SPM), Kiro
  POPOVSKI, president; Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization -
  Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity (VMRO-DPMNE), Ljupco
  GEORGIEVSKI, president; Party of Yugoslavs in Macedonia (SJM), Milan
  DURCINOV, president; Democratic Party (DP), Petal GOSEV, president
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Movement for All Macedonian Action (MAAK); Democratic Party of Serbs;
  Democratic Party of Turks; Party for Democratic Action (Slavic Muslim)
Member of: 
  CE (guest), CSCE (observer), EBRD, ECE, ICAO, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), ITU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  the US recognized The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on 9
  February 1994
US diplomatic representation: 
  the US recognized The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on 9
  February 1994
Flag: 
  16-point gold sun (Vergina, Sun) centered on a red field

@The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Economy

Overview: 
  The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, although the poorest
  republic in the former Yugoslav federation, can meet basic food and
  energy needs through its own agricultural and coal resources. Its
  economic decline will continue unless ties are reforged or enlarged
  with its neighbors Serbia and Montenegro, Albania, Greece, and
  Bulgaria. The economy depends on outside sources for all of its oil
  and gas and its modern machinery and parts. Continued political
  turmoil, both internally and in the region as a whole, prevents any
  swift readjustments of trade patterns and economic programs. The
  country's industrial output and GDP are expected to decline further in
  1994. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's geographical
  isolation, technological backwardness, and potential political
  instability place it far down the list of countries of interest to
  Western investors. Resolution of the dispute with Greece and an
  internal commitment to economic reform would help to encourage foreign
  investment over the long run. In the immediate future, the worst
  scenario for the economy would be the spread of fighting across its
  borders.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent -  $2.2 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -14.7% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  13% monthly average (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  27% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $889 million (1993)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods 40%, machinery and transport equipment 14%,
  miscellaneous manufactured articles 23%, raw materials 7.6%, food
  (rice) and live animals 5.7%, beverages and tobacco 4.5%, chemicals
  4.7% (1990)
partners: 
  principally Serbia and Montenegro and the other former Yugoslav
  republics, Germany, Greece, Albania
Imports: 
  $963 million (1993)
commodities: 
  fuels and lubricants 19%, manufactured goods 18%, machinery and
  transport equipment 15%, food and live animals 14%, chemicals 11.4%,
  raw materials 10%, miscellaneous manufactured articles 8.0%, beverages
  and tobacco 3.5% (1990)
partners: 
  other former Yugoslav republics, Greece, Albania, Germany, Bulgaria
External debt: 
  $840 million (1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -14% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,600,000 kW
production: 
  6.3 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,900 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  low levels of technology predominate, such as, oil refining by
  distillation only; produces basic liquid fuels, coal, metallic
  chromium, lead, zinc, and ferronickel; light industry produces basic
  textiles, wood products, and tobacco
Agriculture: 
  provides 12% of GDP and meets the basic needs for food; principal
  crops are rice, tobacco, wheat, corn, and millet; also grown are
  cotton, sesame, mulberry leaves, citrus fruit, and vegetables; The
  Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is one of the seven legal
  cultivators of the opium poppy for the world pharmaceutical industry,
  including some exports to the US; agricultural production is highly
  labor intensive
Illicit drugs: 
  limited illicit opium cultivation; transshipment point for Asian
  heroin
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US $10 million (for humanitarian and technical assistance)
  EC promised a 100 ECU million economic aid package (1993)
Currency: 
  the denar, which was adopted by the Macedonian legislature 26 April
  1992, was initially issued in the form of a coupon pegged to the
  German mark; subsequently repegged to a basket of seven currencies
Exchange rates: 
  denar per US$1 - 865 (October 1992)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Communications

Railroads: 
  NA
Highways: 
total: 
  10,591 km 
paved: 
  5,091 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,404 km; earth 4,096 km (1991)
Inland waterways: 
  NA km
Pipelines: 
  none
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  16 
usable: 
  16 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  125,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 6 AM, 2 FM, 5 (2 relays) TV;
  370,000 radios, 325,000 TV; satellite communications ground stations -
  none

@The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Force, Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 604,257; fit for military service 489,746; reach
  military age (19) annually 19,539 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  7 billion denars, NA% of GNP (1993 est.); note - conversion of the
  military budget into US dollars using the prevailing exchange rate
  could produce misleading results


@Togo, Geography

Location: 
  Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean beween Benin and
  Ghana
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  56,790 sq km 
land area: 
  54,390 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than West Virginia
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,647 km, Benin 644 km, Burkina 126 km, Ghana 877 km 
Coastline: 
  56 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  30 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north
Terrain: 
  gently rolling savanna in north; central hills; southern plateau; low
  coastal plain with extensive lagoons and marshes
Natural resources: 
  phosphates, limestone, marble 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  25% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  28% 
other: 
  42% 
Irrigated land: 
  70 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation attributable to slash-and-burn agriculture and the use
  of wood for fuel; recent droughts affecting agriculture
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry harmattan wind can reduce visibility in north during winter
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change

@Togo, People

Population: 
  4,255,090 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.59% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  47.3 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  11.39 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  88.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  56.93 years 
male: 
  54.87 years 
female: 
  59.06 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.9 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Togolese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Togolese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  37 tribes; largest and most important are Ewe, Mina, and Kabye,
  European and Syrian-Lebanese under 1%
Religions: 
  indigenous beliefs 70%, Christian 20%, Muslim 10% 
Languages: 
  French (official and the language of commerce), Ewe (one of the two
  major African languages in the south), Mina (one of the two major
  African languages in the south), Dagomba (one of the two major African
  languages in the north), Kabye (one of the two major African languages
  in the north)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  43% 
male: 
  56% 
female: 
  31% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  agriculture 78%, industry 22%
note: 
  about 88,600 wage earners, evenly divided between public and private
  sectors; 50% of population of working age (1985)

@Togo, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Togo 
conventional short form: 
  Togo 
local long form: 
  Republique Togolaise 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  French Togo 
Digraph: 
  TO
Type: 
  republic under transition to multiparty democratic rule
Capital: 
  Lome 
Administrative divisions: 
  23 circumscriptions (circonscriptions, singular - circonscription);
  Amlame (Amou), Aneho (Lacs), Atakpame (Ogou), Badou (Wawa), Bafilo
  (Assoli), Bassar (Bassari), Dapango (Tone), Kande (Keran), Klouto
  (Kloto), Pagouda (Binah), Lama-Kara (Kozah), Lome (Golfe), Mango
  (Oti), Niamtougou (Doufelgou), Notse (Haho), Pagouda, Sotouboua,
  Tabligbo (Yoto), Tchamba, Nyala, Tchaoudjo, Tsevie (Zio), Vogan (Vo)
note: 
  the 23 units may now be called prefectures (prefectures, singular -
  prefecture) and reported name changes for individual units are
  included in parentheses
Independence: 
  27 April 1960 (from UN trusteeship under French administration)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 April (1960) 
Constitution: 
  multiparty draft constitution approved by High Council of the Republic
  1 July 1992; adopted by public referendum 27 September 1992
Legal system: 
  French-based court system
Suffrage: 
  universal adult at age NA
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA (since 14 April 1967); election last
  held 25 August 1993 (next election to be held NA 1998); all major
  opposition parties boycotted the election; Gen. EYADEMA won 96.5% of
  the vote
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Edem KODJO (since April 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president and the prime
  minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections last held on 6 and 20 February 1994 (next to be held NA);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; SEATS - (81 total) RPT and
  allies (pro government) 38, CAR, UTD (the opposition) 40, still
  contested as of 3 May 1994
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal (Cour d'Appel), Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
pro-government: 
  Rally of the Togolese People (RPT), President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA;
  Coordination des Forces Nouvelles (CFN), Joseph KOFFIGOH
moderate: 
  The Togolese Union for Democracy (UTD), Edem KODJO; The Action
  Committee for Renewal (CAR), Yao AGBOYIBOR
radical: 
  The Union for Democracy and Solidarity (UDS), Antoine FOLLY; The
  Pan-African Sociodemocrats Group (GSP), an alliance of three radical
  parties: The Democratic Convention of African Peoples (CDPA), Leopold
  GNININVI; The Party for Democracy and Renewal (PDR), Zarifou AYEVA;
  The Pan-African Social Party (PSP), Francis AGBAGLI; The Union of
  Forces for Change (UFC), Gilchrist OLYMPIO (in exile)
note: 
  Rally of the Togolese People (RPT) led by President EYADEMA was the
  only party until the formation of multiple parties was legalized 12
  April 1991
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEAO (observer), ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ,
  G-77, GATT, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Charge d'Affaires Edem Frederic HEGBE 
chancery: 
  2208 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-4212  
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Harmon E. KIRBY (Ambassador Johnny YOUNG to replace
  Ambassador KIRBY during the summer of 1994) 
embassy: 
  Rue Pelletier Caventou and Rue Vauban, Lome 
mailing address: 
  B. P. 852, Lome 
telephone: 
  [228] 21-29-91 
FAX: 
  [228] 21-79-52 
Flag: 
  five equal horizontal bands of green (top and bottom) alternating with
  yellow; there is a white five-pointed star on a red square in the
  upper hoist-side corner; uses the popular pan-African colors of
  Ethiopia

@Togo, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is heavily dependent on subsistence agriculture, which
  accounts for about 33% of GDP and provides employment for 78% of the
  labor force. Primary agricultural exports are cocoa, coffee, and
  cotton, which together generate about 30% of total export earnings.
  Togo is self-sufficient in basic foodstuffs when harvests are normal.
  In the industrial sector phosphate mining is by far the most important
  activity, although it has suffered from the collapse of World
  phosphate prices and increased foreign competition. Togo serves as a
  regional commercial and trade center. The government's decade-long IMF
  and World Bank supported effort to implement economic reform measures
  to encourage foreign investment and bring revenues in line with
  expenditures has stalled. Political unrest, including private and
  public sector strikes throughout 1992 and 1993, has jeopardized the
  reform program and has disrupted vital economic activity.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  0.5% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $284 million 
expenditures: 
  $407 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $558 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  phosphates, cotton, cocoa, coffee
partners: 
  EC 40%, Africa 16%, US 1% (1990)
Imports: 
  $636 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, consumer goods, food, chemical products
partners: 
  EC 57%, Africa 17%, US 5%, Japan 4% (1990)
External debt: 
  $1.3 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 9% (1991 est.); accounts for 20% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  179,000 kW
production: 
  209 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  60 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  phosphate mining, agricultural processing, cement, handicrafts,
  textiles, beverages
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 33% of GDP; cash crops - coffee, cocoa, cotton; food
  crops - yams, cassava, corn, beans, rice, millet, sorghum; livestock
  production not significant; annual fish catch of 10,000-14,000 tons
Illicit drugs: 
  increasingly used as transit hub by heroin traffickers
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-90), $142 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-90), $2
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $35 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $51 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFA franc (CFAF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 - 592.05
  (January 1994), 283.16 (1993), 264.69 (1992), 282.11 (1991), 272.26
  (1990), 319.01 (1989)
note: 
  the official rate is pegged to the French franc, and beginning 12
  January 1994, the CFA franc was devalued to CFAF 100 per French franc
  from CFAF 50 at which it had been fixed since 1948
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Togo, Communications

Railroads: 
  570 km 1.000-meter gauge, single track
Highways: 
total: 
  6,462 km 
paved: 
  1,762 km 
unpaved: 
  unimproved earth 4,700 km 
Inland waterways: 
  50 km Mono River
Ports: 
  Lome, Kpeme (phosphate port)
Merchant marine: 
  2 roll-on/roll-off cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,118
  GRT/20,529 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  9 
usable: 
  9 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system based on network of radio relay routes supplemented by
  open wire lines; broadcast stations - 2 AM, no FM, 3 (2 relays) TV;
  satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 1 SYMPHONIE

@Togo, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 898,448; fit for military service 471,807 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $43 million, about 3% of GDP (1989)


@Tokelau

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of New Zealand) 

@Tokelau, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, 3,750 km southwest of Honolulu in the South
  Pacific Ocean, about halfway between Hawaii and New Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  10 sq km 
land area: 
  10 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 17 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  101 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by trade winds (April to November)
Terrain: 
  coral atolls enclosing large lagoons
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  very limited natural resources and overcrowding are contributing to
  emigration to New Zealand
natural hazards: 
  lies in Pacific typhoon belt
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Tokelau, People

Population: 
  1,523 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -1.35% (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Tokelauan(s) 
adjective: 
  Tokelauan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian 
Religions: 
  Congregational Christian Church 70%, Roman Catholic 28%, other 2% 
note: 
  on Atafu, all Congregational Christian Church of Samoa; on Nukunonu,
  all Roman Catholic; on Fakaofo, both denominations, with the
  Congregational Christian Church predominant
Languages: 
  Tokelauan (a Polynesian language), English 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA

@Tokelau, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Tokelau 
Digraph: 
  TL
Type: 
  territory of New Zealand 
Capital: 
  none; each atoll has its own administrative center
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of New Zealand)
Independence: 
  none (territory of New Zealand)
National holiday: 
  Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of Waitangi established
  British sovereignty over New Zealand)
Constitution: 
  administered under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948, as amended in 1970
Legal system: 
  British and local statutes
Suffrage: 
  NA
Executive branch: 
Chief of State: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952) 
Head of Government: 
  Administrator Graham ANSELL (since NA 1990; appointed by the Minister
  of Foreign Affairs in New Zealand); Official Secretary Casimilo J.
  PEREZ (since NA), Office of Tokelau Affairs; Tokelau's governing
  Council will elect its first head of government  
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Council of Elders (Taupulega) on each atoll
Judicial branch: 
  High Court in Niue, Supreme Court in New Zealand
Political parties and leaders: 
  NA
Member of: 
  SPC, WHO (associate) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of New Zealand)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of New Zealand)
Flag: 
  the flag of New Zealand is used

@Tokelau, Economy

Overview: 
  Tokelau's small size, isolation, and lack of resources greatly
  restrain economic development and confine agriculture to the
  subsistence level. The people must rely on aid from New Zealand to
  maintain public services, annual aid being substantially greater than
  GDP. The principal sources of revenue come from sales of copra,
  postage stamps, souvenir coins, and handicrafts. Money is also
  remitted to families from relatives in New Zealand.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $1.4 million (1988 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1988 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $430,830 
expenditures: 
  $2.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $37,300 (1987 est.)
Exports: 
  $98,000 (f.o.b., 1983)
commodities: 
  stamps, copra, handicrafts
partners: 
  NZ
Imports: 
  $323,400 (c.i.f., 1983)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, building materials, fuel
partners: 
  NZ
External debt: 
  $0 
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  200 kW
production: 
  300,000 kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  180 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  small-scale enterprises for copra production, wood work, plaited craft
  goods; stamps, coins; fishing
Agriculture: 
  coconuts, copra; basic subsistence crops - breadfruit, papaya,
  bananas; pigs, poultry, goats
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $24 million 
Currency: 
  1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1 - 1.7771 (January 1994), 1.8495
  (1993), 1.8584 (1992), l.7265 (1991), 1.6750 (1990), 1.6708 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April-31 March

@Tokelau, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
  none; lagoon landings by amphibious aircraft from Western Samoa
Telecommunications: 
  radiotelephone service between islands and to Western Samoa

@Tokelau, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of New Zealand


@Tonga, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, 2,250 km north-northwest of New Zealand, about
  two-thirds of the way between Hawaii and New Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  748 sq km 
land area: 
  718 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than four times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  419 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; modified by trade winds; warm season (December to May), cool
  season (May to December)
Terrain: 
  most islands have limestone base formed from uplifted coral formation;
  others have limestone overlying volcanic base
Natural resources: 
  fish, fertile soil 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  25% 
permanent crops: 
  55% 
meadows and pastures: 
  6% 
forest and woodland: 
  12% 
other: 
  2% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to cyclones (October to April)
international agreements: 
  party to - Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  archipelago of 170 islands (36 inhabited)

@Tonga, People

Population: 
  104,778 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.79% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  24.76 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.75 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -10.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  20.79 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.97 years 
male: 
  65.64 years 
female: 
  70.43 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.62 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Tongan(s) 
adjective: 
  Tongan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian, Europeans about 300
Religions: 
  Christian (Free Wesleyan Church claims over 30,000 adherents)
Languages: 
  Tongan, English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write simple message in Tongan or English
  (1976)
total population: 
  57% 
male: 
  60% 
female: 
  60% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  agriculture 70%, mining (600 engaged in mining)

@Tonga, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Kingdom of Tonga 
conventional short form: 
  Tonga 
former: 
  Friendly Islands 
Digraph: 
  TN
Type: 
  hereditary constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  Nuku'alofa 
Administrative divisions: 
  three island groups; Ha'apai, Tongatapu, Vava'u
Independence: 
  4 June 1970 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Emancipation Day, 4 June (1970) 
Constitution: 
  4 November 1875, revised 1 January 1967
Legal system: 
  based on English law
Suffrage: 
  all literate, tax-paying males and all literate females over 21
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  King Taufa'ahau TUPOU IV (since 16 December 1965) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Baron VAEA (since 22 August 1991); Deputy Prime
  Minister S. Langi KAVALIKU (since 22 August 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the king
Privy Council: 
  consists of the king and the cabinet
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly (Fale Alea): 
  elections last held 14-15 February 1990 (next to be held NA February
  1993); results - percent of vote NA; seats - (29 total, 9 elected) 6
  proreform, 3 traditionalist
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Reform Movement, 'Akilisi POHIVA; Christian Democratic
  Party, leader NA
Member of: 
  ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IMF, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS,
  SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Ambassador Sione KITE, resides in London
consulate(s) general: 
  San Francisco 
US diplomatic representation: 
  the US has no offices in Tonga; the ambassador to Fiji is accredited
  to Tonga and makes periodic visits
Flag: 
  red with a bold red cross on a white rectangle in the upper hoist-side
  corner

@Tonga, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy's base is agriculture, which employs about 70% of the
  labor force and contributes 40% to GDP. Coconuts, bananas, and vanilla
  beans are the main crops and make up two-thirds of exports. The
  country must import a high proportion of its food, mainly from New
  Zealand. The manufacturing sector accounts for only 11% of GDP.
  Tourism is the primary source of hard currency earnings, but the
  island remains dependent on sizable external aid and remittances to
  offset its trade deficit. The economy continued to grow in 1993
  largely because of a rise in squash exports, increased aid flows, and
  several large construction projects. The government is now turning its
  attention to further development of the private sector and the
  reduction of the budget deficit.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $200 million (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  4% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9% (FY92)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $36.4 million 
expenditures: 
  $68.1 million, including capital expenditures of $33.2 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $18.8 million (f.o.b., FY92 est.)
commodities: 
  vanilla, fish, root crops, coconut oil, squash
partners: 
  Japan 34%, US 17%, Australia 13%, NZ 13% (FY91)
Imports: 
  $68.3 million (c.i.f., FY92 est.)
commodities: 
  food products, machinery and transport equipment, manufactures, fuels,
  chemicals
partners: 
  NZ 33%, Australia 22%, US 8%, Japan 8% (FY91)
External debt: 
  $47.5 million (FY91)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.5% (FY92); accounts for 11% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,000 kW
production: 
  8 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  80 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  tourism, fishing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 40% of GDP; dominated by coconut, copra, and banana
  production; vanilla beans, cocoa, coffee, ginger, black pepper
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $16 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $258
  million 
Currency: 
  1 pa'anga (T$) = 100 seniti
Exchange rates: 
  pa'anga (T$) per US$1 - 1.3934 (November 1993), 1.3471 (1992), 1.2961
  (1991), 1.2809 (1990), 1.2637 (1989),
Fiscal year: 
  1 July-30 June

@Tonga, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  366 km 
paved: 
  272 km (198 km on Tongatapu; 74 km on Vava'u)
unpaved: 
  94 km (usable only in dry weather)
Ports: 
  Nuku'alofa, Neiafu, Pangai
Merchant marine: 
  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,761 GRT/10,597 DWT, cargo 1,
  liquefied gas 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  6 
usable: 
  6 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  3,529 telephones; 66,000 radios; no TV sets; broadcast stations - 1
  AM, no FM, no TV; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Tonga, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Tonga Defense Services, Maritime Division, Royal Tongan Marines,
  Tongan Royal Guards, Police 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Trinidad and Tobago, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the extreme southeastern Caribbean Sea, 11 km off the
  coast of Venezuela
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  5,130 sq km 
land area: 
  5,130 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Delaware
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  362 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the outer edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy season (June to December)
Terrain: 
  mostly plains with some hills and low mountains
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, asphalt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  14% 
permanent crops: 
  17% 
meadows and pastures: 
  2% 
forest and woodland: 
  44% 
other: 
  23% 
Irrigated land: 
  220 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from agricultural chemicals, industrial wastes, and
  untreated sewage; oil pollution of beaches; land degradation
natural hazards: 
  outside usual path of hurricanes and other tropical storms
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change

@Trinidad and Tobago, People

Population: 
  1,328,282 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.1% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.6 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.28 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.33 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  16.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.73 years 
male: 
  68.09 years 
female: 
  73.43 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.32 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Trinidadian(s), Tobagonian(s) 
adjective: 
  Trinidadian, Tobagonian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  black 43%, East Indian 40%, mixed 14%, white 1%, Chinese 1%, other 1% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 32.2%, Hindu 24.3%, Anglican 14.4%, other Protestant
  14%, Muslim 6%, none or unknown 9.1% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Hindi, French, Spanish 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1980)
total population: 
  95% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  93% 
Labor force: 
  463,900 
by occupation: 
  construction and utilities 18.1%, manufacturing, mining, and quarrying
  14.8%, agriculture 10.9%, other 56.2% (1985 est.)

@Trinidad and Tobago, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Trinidad and Tobago 
conventional short form: 
  Trinidad and Tobago 
Digraph: 
  TD
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Port-of-Spain 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 counties, 3 municipalities*, and 1 ward**; Arima*, Caroni, Mayaro,
  Nariva, Port-of-Spain*, Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint
  Patrick, San Fernando*, Tobago**, Victoria
Independence: 
  31 August 1962 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 31 August (1962) 
Constitution: 
  1 August 1976
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; judicial review of legislative acts in
  the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Noor Mohammed HASSANALI (since 18 March 1987) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Patrick Augustus Mervyn MANNING (since 17 December
  1991) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; responsible to parliament
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
Senate: 
  consists of a 31-member body appointed by the president
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 16 December 1991 (next to be held by December
  1996); results - PNM 32%, UNC 13%, NAR 2%; seats - (36 total) PNM 21,
  UNC 13, NAR 2
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's National Movement (PNM), Patrick MANNING; United National
  Congress (UNC), Basdeo PANDAY; National Alliance for Reconstruction
  (NAR), Selby WILSON; Movement for Social Transformation (MOTION),
  David ABDULLAH; National Joint Action Committee (NJAC), Makandal
  DAAGA; Republic Party, Nello MITCHELL; National Development Party
  (NDP), Carson CHARLES
Member of: 
  ACP, C, CARICOM, CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-24, G-77, GATT, IADB, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  ISO, ITU, LAES, LORCS, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Corinne Averille McKNIGHT 
chancery: 
  1708 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 467-6490 
FAX: 
  (202) 785-3130 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Sally G. COWAL 
embassy: 
  15 Queen's Park West, Port-of-Spain 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 752, Port-of-Spain 
telephone: 
  (809) 622-6372 through 6376, 6176 
FAX: 
  (809) 628-5462 
Flag: 
  red with a white-edged black diagonal band from the upper hoist side

@Trinidad and Tobago, Economy

Overview: 
  Trinidad and Tobago's petroleum-based economy still enjoys a high per
  capita income by Latin American standards, even though output and
  living standards are substantially below the boom years of 1973-82.
  The country suffers from widespread unemployment, large foreign-debt
  payments, and periods of low international oil prices. Seven
  successive years of economic contraction were followed by small gains
  in output in 1990-91 of 1.2% and 0.9%, in turn followed by small
  declines in 1992-93 of roughly 1.0%. The government has begun to make
  progress in its efforts to diversify exports.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $10.4 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $8,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  9.5% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  18.5% (1991)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.6 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $158 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals, steel products,
  fertilizer, sugar, cocoa, coffee, citrus, flowers
partners: 
  US 47%, CARICOM 13%, Latin America 9%, EC 5% (1992)
Imports: 
  $900 million (f.o.b. , 1993)
commodities: 
  machinery, transportation equipment, manufactured goods, food, live
  animals (1992)
partners: 
  US 41%, Venezuela 10%, UK 8%, other EC 8%
External debt: 
  $2 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.3% (1991); accounts for 37% of GDP, including petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,176,000 kW
production: 
  3.48 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,680 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, chemicals, tourism, food processing, cement, beverage,
  cotton textiles
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 3% of GDP; highly subsidized sector; major crops - cocoa,
  sugarcane; sugarcane acreage is being shifted into rice, citrus,
  coffee, vegetables; poultry sector most important source of animal
  protein; must import large share of food needs
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for South American drugs destined for the US and
  Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $373 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $518
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Trinidad and Tobago dollar (TT$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Trinidad and Tobago dollars (TT$) per US$1 - 5.8111 (January 1994),
  5.3511 (1993), 4.2500 (fixed rate 1989-1992); note - effective 13
  April 1993, the exchange rate of the TT dollar is market-determined as
  opposed to the prior fixed relationship to the US dollar
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Trinidad and Tobago, Communications

Railroads: 
  minimal agricultural railroad system near San Fernando
Highways: 
total: 
  8,000 km 
paved: 
  4,000 km 
unpaved: 
  improved earth 1,000 km; unimproved earth 3,000 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,032 km; petroleum products 19 km; natural gas 904 km 
Ports: 
  Port-of-Spain, Pointe-a-Pierre, Scarborough
Merchant marine: 
  2 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 12,507 GRT/21,923 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  6 
usable: 
  5 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent international service via tropospheric scatter links to
  Barbados and Guyana; good local service; 109,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 2 AM, 4 FM, 5 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Trinidad and Tobago, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Trinidad and Tobago Defense Force (including Ground Forces, Coast
  Guard, and Air Wing), Trinidad and Tobago Police Service 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 357,904; fit for military service 257,667 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $59 million, 1%-2% of GDP (1989 est.)


@Tromelin Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (possession of France) 

@Tromelin Island, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, in the western Indian Ocean, 350 km east of
  Madagascar and 600 km north of Reunion
Map references: 
  World 
Area: 
total area: 
  1 sq km 
land area: 
  1 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  3.7 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  12 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by Madagascar, Mauritius, and Seychelles
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  sandy
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% (scattered bushes)
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  climatologically important location for forecasting cyclones; wildlife
  sanctuary

@Tromelin Island, People

Population: 
  uninhabited

@Tromelin Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Tromelin Island 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ile Tromelin 
Digraph: 
  TE
Type: 
  French possession administered by Commissioner of the Republic,
  resident in Reunion
Capital: 
  none; administered by France from Reunion
Independence: 
  none (possession of France)

@Tromelin Island, Economy

Overview: 
  no economic activity

@Tromelin Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; offshore anchorage only
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  important meteorological station

@Tromelin Island, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@Tunisia, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, 144 km from Italy across the Strait of Sicily,
  between Algeria and Libya
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  163,610 sq km 
land area: 
  155,360 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Georgia
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,424 km, Algeria 965 km, Libya 459 km 
Coastline: 
  1,148 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary dispute with Libya; land boundary dispute with
  Algeria settled in 1993
Climate: 
  temperate in north with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry summers;
  desert in south
Terrain: 
  mountains in north; hot, dry central plain; semiarid south merges into
  the Sahara
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, phosphates, iron ore, lead, zinc, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  10% 
meadows and pastures: 
  19% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  47% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,750 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  toxic and hazardous waste disposal is ineffective and presents human
  health risks; water pollution from untreated sewage; water scarcity;
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands; signed,
  but not ratified - Marine Life Conservation
Note: 
  strategic location in central Mediterranean

@Tunisia, People

Population: 
  8,726,562 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.76% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  23.4 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.95 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.85 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  34.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.89 years 
male: 
  70.85 years 
female: 
  75.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.88 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Tunisian(s) 
adjective: 
  Tunisian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab-Berber 98%, European 1%, Jewish less than 1%
Religions: 
  Muslim 98%, Christian 1%, Jewish 1% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official and one of the languages of commerce), French
  (commerce)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  65% 
male: 
  74% 
female: 
  56% 
Labor force: 
  2.25 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 32%
note: 
  shortage of skilled labor

@Tunisia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Tunisia 
conventional short form: 
  Tunisia 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah at Tunisiyah 
local short form: 
  Tunis 
Digraph: 
  TS
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Tunis 
Administrative divisions: 
  23 governorates; Beja, Ben Arous, Bizerte, Gabes, Gafsa, Jendouba,
  Kairouan, Kasserine, Kebili, L'Ariana, Le Kef, Mahdia, Medenine,
  Monastir, Nabeul, Sfax, Sidi Bou Zid, Siliana, Sousse, Tataouine,
  Tozeur, Tunis, Zaghouan
Independence: 
  20 March 1956 (from France)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 20 March (1956) 
Constitution: 
  1 June 1959; amended 12 July 1988
Legal system: 
  based on French civil law system and Islamic law; some judicial review
  of legislative acts in the Supreme Court in joint session
Suffrage: 
  20 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Gen. Zine el Abidine BEN ALI (since 7 November 1987);
  election last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held NA); results - Gen.
  Zine el Abidine BEN ALI was reelected without opposition
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Hamed KAROUI (since 26 September 1989) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Chamber of Deputies (Majlis al-Nuwaab): 
  elections last held 2 April 1989 (next to be held NA March 1994);
  results - RCD 80.7%, independents/Islamists 13.7%, MDS 3.2%, other
  2.4%; seats - (141 total) RCD 141
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Cassation (Cour de Cassation) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (RCD), President BEN ALI
  (official ruling party); Movement of Democratic Socialists (MDS),
  Mohammed MOUAADA; five other political parties are legal, including
  the Communist Party
Other political or pressure groups: 
  the Islamic fundamentalist party, An Nahda (Rebirth), is outlawed
Member of: 
  ABEDA, ACCT, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO, NAM,
  OAPEC (withdrew from active membership in 1986), OAS (observer), OAU,
  OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNTAC, UPU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Ismail KHALIL 
chancery: 
  1515 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 862-1850 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador John T. McCARTHY 
embassy: 
  144 Avenue de la Liberte, 1002 Tunis-Belvedere 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [216] (1) 782-566 
FAX: 
  [216] (1) 789-719 
Flag: 
  red with a white disk in the center bearing a red crescent nearly
  encircling a red five-pointed star; the crescent and star are
  traditional symbols of Islam

@Tunisia, Economy

Overview: 
  Tunisia has a diverse economy, with important agricultural, mining,
  energy, tourism and manufacturing sectors. The economy grew rapidly in
  the mid-1980s, GDP growth averaging 5.4% in 1983-85. Following a
  foreign exchange crisis caused by a sharp drop in agricultural output
  and tourism, combined with the oil price collapse in 1986, Tunisia
  inaugurated an IMF-sponsored economic rehabilitation scheme.
  Subsequent government structural reforms have helped liberalize and
  open the economy, and GDP growth has been positive since the start of
  the program. A sharp rebound in tourism from the downturn caused by
  the Gulf war and strong agricultural performance boosted real GDP
  growth to more than 8% in 1992; growth fell back to 2.6% in 1993.
  Further privatization and further improvements in government
  administrative efficiency are among the challenges for the future.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $34.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $4,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  4.5% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  16.2% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $4.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $5.5 billion, including capital expenditures to $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $4.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  hydrocarbons, agricultural products, phosphates and chemicals
partners: 
  EC countries 75%, Middle East 10%, Algeria 2%, India 2%, US 1%
Imports: 
  $6.4 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  industrial goods and equipment 57%, hydrocarbons 13%, food 12%,
  consumer goods
partners: 
  EC countries 70%, US 5%, Middle East 2%, Japan 2%, Switzerland 1%,
  Algeria 1%
External debt: 
  $7.7 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5% (1989); accounts for about 25% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,545,000 kW
production: 
  5,096 kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  600 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, mining (particularly phosphate and iron ore), tourism,
  textiles, footwear, food, beverages
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 16% of GDP and one-third of labor force; output subject
  to severe fluctuations because of frequent droughts; export crops -
  olives, dates, oranges, almonds; other products - grain, sugar beets,
  wine grapes, poultry, beef, dairy; not self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $730 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89) $52
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $684 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89),  $410 million 
Currency: 
  1 Tunisian dinar (TD) = 1,000 millimes
Exchange rates: 
  Tunisian dinars (TD) per US$1 - 1.0514 (January 1994), 1.0037 (1993),
  0.8844 (1992), 0.9246 (1991), 0.8783 (1990), 0.9493 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Tunisia, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,115 km total; 465 km 1.435-meter (standard) gauge; 1,650 km
  1.000-meter gauge
Highways: 
total: 
  17,700 km 
paved: 
  bituminous 9,100 km 
unpaved: 
  improved, unimproved earth 8,600 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 797 km; petroleum products 86 km; natural gas 742 km 
Ports: 
  Bizerte, Gabes, Sfax, Sousse, Tunis, La Goulette, Zarzis
Merchant marine: 
  23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 152,683 GRT/199,273 DWT, bulk 6,
  cargo 6, chemical tanker 6, liquefied gas 1, oil tanker 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  31 
usable: 
  27 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  14 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  9 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
note: 
  a new airport opened 6 May 1993, length and type of surface NA
Telecommunications: 
  the system is above the African average; facilities consist of
  open-wire lines, coaxial cable, and microwave radio relay; key centers
  are Sfax, Sousse, Bizerte, and Tunis; 233,000 telephones (28
  telephones per 1,000 persons); broadcast stations - 7 AM, 8 FM, 19 TV;
  5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean
  INTELSAT and 1 ARABSAT with back-up control station; coaxial cable and
  microwave radio relay to Algeria and Libya

@Tunisia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary forces, National Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,229,362; fit for military service 1,281,015; reach
  military age (20) annually 91,941 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $618 million, 3.7% of GDP (1993 est.)


@Turkey, Geography

Location: 
  Southwestern Asia (that part west of the Bosporus is sometimes
  included with Europe), bordering the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea,
  between Bulgaria and Iran
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  780,580 sq km 
land area: 
  770,760 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,627 km, Armenia 268 km, Azerbaijan 9 km, Bulgaria 240 km,
  Georgia 252 km, Greece 206 km, Iran 499 km, Iraq 331 km, Syria 822 km 
Coastline: 
  7,200 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  in Black Sea only - to the maritime boundary agreed upon with the
  former USSR
territorial sea: 
  6 nm in the Aegean Sea,
  12 nm in the Black Sea and in the Mediterranean Sea
International disputes: 
  complex maritime and air (but not territorial) disputes with Greece in
  Aegean Sea; Cyprus question; Hatay question with Syria; ongoing
  dispute with downstream riparians (Syria and Iraq) over water
  development plans for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers
Climate: 
  temperate; hot, dry summers with mild, wet winters; harsher in
  interior
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains; narrow coastal plain; high central plateau
  (Anatolia)
Natural resources: 
  antimony, coal, chromium, mercury, copper, borate, sulphur, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  30% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  12% 
forest and woodland: 
  26% 
other: 
  28% 
Irrigated land: 
  22,200 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  water pollution from dumping of chemicals and detergents; air
  pollution; deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to very severe earthquakes, especially in northern Turkey,
  along an arc extending from the Sea of Marmara to Lake Van
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
Note: 
  strategic location controlling the Turkish Straits (Bosporus, Sea of
  Marmara, Dardanelles) that link Black and Aegean Seas

@Turkey, People

Population: 
  62,153,898 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.02% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.98 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.8 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  48.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.94 years 
male: 
  68.61 years 
female: 
  73.38 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.21 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Turk(s) 
adjective: 
  Turkish 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Turkish 80%, Kurdish 20% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 99.8% (mostly Sunni), other 0.2% (Christian and Jews)
Languages: 
  Turkish (official), Kurdish, Arabic 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  81% 
male: 
  90% 
female: 
  71% 
Labor force: 
  20.8 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 48%, services 32%, industry 20%
note: 
  about 1,800,000 Turks work abroad (1993)

@Turkey, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Turkey 
conventional short form: 
  Turkey 
local long form: 
  Turkiye Cumhuriyeti 
local short form: 
  Turkiye 
Digraph: 
  TU
Type: 
  republican parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Ankara 
Administrative divisions: 
  73 provinces (iller, singular - il); Adana, Adiyaman, Afyon, Agri,
  Aksaray, Amasya, Ankara, Antalya, Artvin, Aydin, Balikesir, Batman,
  Bayburt, Bilecik, Bingol, Bitlis, Bolu, Burdur, Bursa, Canakkale,
  Cankiri, Corum, Denizli, Diyarbakir, Edirne, Elazig, Erzincan,
  Erzurum, Eskisehir, Gazi Antep, Giresun, Gumushane, Hakkari, Hatay,
  Icel, Isparta, Istanbul, Izmir, Kahraman Maras, Karaman, Kars,
  Kastamonu, Kayseri, Kirikkale, Kirklareli, Kirsehir, Kocaeli, Konya,
  Kutahya, Malatya, Manisa, Mardin, Mugla, Mus, Nevsehir, Nigde, Ordu,
  Rize, Sakarya, Samsun, Sanli Urfa, Siirt, Sinop, Sirnak, Sivas,
  Tekirdag, Tokat, Trabzon, Tunceli, Usak, Van, Yozgat, Zonguldak
Independence: 
  29 October 1923 (successor state to the Ottoman Empire)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Declaration of the Republic, 29 October (1923) 
Constitution: 
  7 November 1982
Legal system: 
  derived from various continental legal systems; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Suleyman DEMIREL (since 16 May 1993) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Tansu CILLER (since 5 July 1993) 
National Security Council: 
  advisory body to the President and the Cabinet
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president on nomination of the
  prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Turkish Grand National Assembly: 
  (Turkiye Buyuk Millet Meclisi) elections last held 20 October 1991
  (next to be held NA October 1996); results - DYP 27.03%, ANAP 24.01%,
  SHP 20.75%, RP 16.88%, DSP 10.75%, SBP 0.44%, independent 0.14%; seats
  - (450 total) DYP 178, ANAP 115, SHP 86, RP 40, MCP 19, DSP 7, other 5
note: 
  seats held by various parties are subject to change due to defections,
  creation of new parties, and ouster or death of sitting deputies;
  present seats by party are as follows: DYP 178, ANAP 101, SHP 55, RP
  39, CHP 18, MHP 13, DEP 13, BBP 7, DSP 3, YP 3, MP 2, independents 10,
  vacant 8
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Cassation 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Correct Way Party (DYP), Tansu CILLER; Motherland Party (ANAP), Mesut
  YILMAZ; Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP), Murat KARAYALCIN;
  Welfare Party (RP), Necmettin ERBAKAN; Democratic Left Party (DSP),
  Bulent ECEVIT; Nationalist Action Party (MHP), Alparslan TURKES;
  Democracy Party (DEP), Hatip DICLE; Socialist Unity Party (SBP), Sadun
  AREN; New Party (YP), Yusuf Bozkurt OZAL; Republican People's Party
  (CHP), Deniz BAYKAL; Labor Party (IP), Dogu PERINCEK; National Party
  (MP), Aykut EDIBALI; Democrat Party (DP), Aydin MENDERES; Grand Unity
  Party (BBP), Muhsin YAZICIOGLU; Rebirth Party (YDP), Hasan Celal
  GUZEL; People's Democracy Party (HADEP), Murat BOZLAK; Main Path Party
  (ANAYOL), Gurcan BASER; Democratic Target Party, Abdul Kadir Yasar
  TURK
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Turkish Confederation of Labor (TURK-IS), Bayram MERAL
Member of: 
  AsDB, BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE, CERN (observer), COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, ECE,
  ECO, FAO, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IEA, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, NACC, NATO, NEA, OECD, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOSOM, UNRWA, UPU, WEU (associate), WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Nuzhet KANDEMIR 
chancery: 
  1714 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036 
telephone: 
  (202) 659-8200 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Richard C. BARKLEY 
embassy: 
  110 Ataturk Boulevard, Ankara 
mailing address: 
  PSC 93, Box 5000, Ankara, or APO AE 09823 
telephone: 
  [90] (312) 468-6110 through 6128 
FAX: 
  [90] (312) 467-0019 
consulate(s) general: 
  Istanbul  
consulate(s): 
  Adana 
Flag: 
  red with a vertical white crescent (the closed portion is toward the
  hoist side) and white five-pointed star centered just outside the
  crescent opening

@Turkey, Economy

Overview: 
  In early 1994, after an impressive economic performance through most
  of the 1980s, Turkey faces its most damaging economic crisis in the
  last 15 years. Sparked by the downgrading in mid-January of Turkey's
  international credit rating by two US credit rating agencies, the
  crisis stems from two years of loose fiscal and monetary policies that
  have exacerbated inflation and allowed the public debt, money supply,
  and current account deficit to explode. Under Prime Minister CILLER,
  Ankara has followed seriously flawed policies that have destroyed
  public confidence in the government's ability to manage the economy.
  Inflation is now running at an annual rate of 107% and the public
  sector deficit is equivalent to 16% of GDP. Turkish firms have been
  hurt by high interest rates and a dramatic drop in consumer demand.
  Three Turkish banks have folded and the stock market has fallen 48%
  since the beginning of the year. Economic growth may drop to between
  0% and 2% in 1994, compared to 7.3% in 1993. Moreover, the government
  is facing a severe cash crunch. In March 1994, the treasury came close
  to defaulting on a loan, and official foreign currency reserves are
  equal to less than two months' worth of imports. The unprecedented
  effort by the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) to raise the economic
  costs of its insurgency against the Turkish state is adding to
  Turkey's economic problems. Attacks against the tourism industry have
  cut tourist revenues, which account for about 3% of GDP, while
  economic activity in southeastern Turkey, where most of the violence
  occurs, has dropped considerably. To cope with the economic crisis and
  instill domestic and international investor confidence in the fragile
  coalition government, CILLER has asked the IMF to endorse a
  stabilization package she introduced in early April 1994. Negotiations
  are underway for a standby agreement, which would give Turkey access
  to $450 million this year and enable her cash-starved government to
  return to the foreign capital markets.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $312.4 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.3% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $5,100 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  65% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  12.2% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $36.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $47.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $5 billion (1994)
Exports: 
  $14.9 billion (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  manufactured products 72%, foodstuffs 23%, mining products 4%
partners: 
  EC countries 53%, US 6%, Russia 4%, Saudi Arabia 3%
Imports: 
  $22.9 billion (c.i.f., 1992)
commodities: 
  manufactured products 68%, fuels 17%, foodstuffs 4%
partners: 
  EC countries 44%, US 11%, Saudi Arabia 7%, Russia 5%
External debt: 
  $59.4 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.3% (1992); accounts for 28% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  14,400,000 kW
production: 
  44 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  750 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  textiles, food processing, mining (coal, chromite, copper, boron
  minerals), steel, petroleum, construction, lumber, paper
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 16% of GDP and employs about half of working force;
  products - tobacco, cotton, grain, olives, sugar beets, pulses, citrus
  fruit, variety of animal products; self-sufficient in food most years
Illicit drugs: 
  major transit route for Southwest Asian heroin and hashish to Western
  Europe and the US via air, land, and sea routes; major Turkish,
  Iranian, and other international trafficking organizations operate out
  of Istanbul; laboratories to convert imported morphine base into
  heroin are in remote regions of Turkey as well as near Istanbul;
  government maintains strict controls over areas of legal opium poppy
  cultivation and output of poppy straw concentrate
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $2.3 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $10.1
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $665 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $4.5 billion 
note: 
  aid for Persian Gulf war efforts from coalition allies (1991), $4.1
  billion; aid pledged for Turkish Defense Fund, $2.5 billion
Currency: 
  1 Turkish lira (TL) = 100 kurus
Exchange rates: 
  Turkish liras (TL) per US$1 - 15,196.1 (January 1994), 10,983.3
  (1993), 6,872.4 (1992), 4,171.8 (1991), 2,608.6 (1990), 2,121.7 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Turkey, Communications

Railroads: 
  8,429 km 1.435-meter gauge (including 795 km electrified)
Highways: 
total: 
  320,611 km 
paved: 
  27,000 km (including 138 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  gravel 18,500 km; earth 275,111 km (1988)
Inland waterways: 
  about 1,200 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,738 km; petroleum products 2,321 km; natural gas 708 km 
Ports: 
  Iskenderun, Istanbul, Mersin, Izmir
Merchant marine: 
  390 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,664,205 GRT/8,163,379 DWT,
  bulk 103, cargo 195, chemical tanker 10, combination bulk 5,
  combination ore/oil 12, container 2, liquefied gas 4, livestock
  carrier 1, oil tanker 41, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 5, short-sea passenger 7, specialized tanker 2 
Airports: 
total: 
  113 
usable: 
  105 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  69 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  32 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  27 
Telecommunications: 
  fair domestic and international systems; trunk radio relay microwave
  network; limited open wire network; 3,400,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 15 AM; 94 FM; 357 TV; 1 satellite ground station operating
  in the INTELSAT (2 Atlantic Ocean antennas) and EUTELSAT systems; 1
  submarine cable

@Turkey, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Land Forces, Navy (including Naval Air and Naval Infantry), Air Force,
  Coast Guard, Gendarmerie 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 16,112,783; fit for military service 9,828,853; reach
  military age (20) annually 614,252 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $14 billion, 5.6% of GDP (1994 est.)


@Turkmenistan, Geography

Location: 
  Central Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea, between Iran and Uzbekistan
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian States,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  488,100 sq km 
land area: 
  488,100 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,736 km, Afghanistan 744 km, Iran 992 km, Kazakhstan 379 km,
  Uzbekistan 1,621 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km 
note: 
  Turkmenistan borders the Caspian Sea (1,768 km)
Maritime claims: 
  landlocked, but boundaries in the Caspian Sea with Azerbaijan,
  Kazakhstan, and Iran are under negotiations
International disputes: 
  Russia may dispute current de facto maritime border to midpoint of
  Caspian Sea from shore
Climate: 
  subtropical desert
Terrain: 
  flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes rising to mountains in the
  south; low mountains along border with Iran; borders Caspian Sea in
  west
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, coal, sulphur, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  69% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  28% 
Irrigated land: 
  12,450 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  contamination of soil and groundwater with agricultural chemicals,
  pesticides; salinization, water-logging of soil due to poor irrigation
  methods; Caspian Sea pollution; diversion of a large share of the flow
  of the Amu Darya river into irrigation contributes to that river's
  inability to replenish the Aral Sea; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Ozone Layer Protection
Note: 
  landlocked

@Turkmenistan, People

Population: 
  3,995,122 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.01% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  30.42 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.44 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.89 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  69.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.14 years 
male: 
  61.63 years 
female: 
  68.82 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.77 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Turkmen(s) 
adjective: 
  Turkmen 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Turkmen 73.3%, Russian 9.8%, Uzbek 9%, Kazakh 2%, other 5.9% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 87%, Eastern Orthodox 11%, unknown 2% 
Languages: 
  Turkmen 72%, Russian 12%, Uzbek 9%, other 7% 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  1.573 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and forestry 44%, industry and construction 20%, other 36%
  (1992)

@Turkmenistan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Turkmenistan 
local long form: 
  Tiurkmenostan Respublikasy 
local short form: 
  Turkmenistan 
former: 
  Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  TX
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Ashgabat 
Administrative divisions: 
  5 welayatlar (singular - welayat): Ahal Welayaty (Ashgabat), Balkan
  Welayaty (Nebitdag), Dashhowuz Welayaty (formerly Tashauz), Lebap
  Welayaty (Charjew), Mary Welayaty
note: 
  names in parentheses are administrative centers when name differs from
  welayat name
Independence: 
  27 October 1991 (from the Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 27 October (1991) 
Constitution: 
  adopted 18 May 1992
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Saparmurad NIYAZOV (since NA October 1990); election last
  held 21 June 1992 (next to be held NA 2002); results - Saparmurad
  NIYAZOV 99.5% (ran unopposed); note - a 15 January 1994 referendum
  extended NIYAZOV's term an additional five years until 2002 (99.99%
  approval)
head of government: 
  Prime Minister (vacant); Deputy Prime Ministers Batyr SARDJAEV, Valery
  G. OCHERTSOV, Orazgeldi AIDOGDIEV, Djourakuli BABAKULIYEV, Rejep
  SAPAROV, Boris SHIKHMURADOV, Abad RIZAEVA, Yagmur OVEZOV (since NA)
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  under 1992 constitution there are two parliamentary bodies, a
  unicameral People's Council (Halk Maslahaty - having more than 100
  members and meeting infrequently) and a 50-member unicameral Assembly
  (Majlis)
Assembly (Majlis): 
  elections last held 7 January 1990 (next to be held late 1994 or early
  1995); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (175 total)
  elections not officially by party, but Communist Party members won
  nearly 90% of seats; note - seats to be reduced to 50 at next election
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
ruling party: 
  Democratic Party (formerly Communist), chairman vacant
opposition: 
  Party for Democratic Development, Durdymurat HOJA-MUKHAMMED, chairman;
  Agzybirlik, Nurberdy NURMAMEDOV, cochairman, Hubayberdi HALLIYEV,
  cochairman
note: 
  formal opposition parties are outlawed; unofficial, small opposition
  movements exist
Member of: 
  CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDB, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NACC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Khalil UGUR 
chancery: 
  1511 K Street NW, Suite 412, Washington, DC, 20005 
telephone: 
  NA 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Joseph S. HULINGS III 
embassy: 
  Yubilenaya Hotel, Ashgabat 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [7] 36320 24-49-25 or 24-49-26 
Flag: 
  green field, including a vertical stripe on the hoist side, with a
  claret vertical stripe in between containing five white, black, and
  orange carpet guls (an assymetrical design used in producing rugs)
  associated with five different tribes; a white crescent and five white
  stars in the upper left corner to the right of the carpet guls

@Turkmenistan, Economy

Overview: 
  Turkmenistan is a largely desert country with nomadic cattle raising,
  intensive agriculture in irrigated oases, and huge gas and oil
  resources. Half of its irrigated land is planted in cotton; it is the
  world's tenth largest producer. It also is the world's fourth largest
  producer of natural gas and has the fifth largest reserves.
  Furthermore, Turkmenistan has substantial oil resources; its two oil
  refineries make it an exporter of refined products. Profiting from the
  move toward market prices for its oil and gas resources, Turkmenistan
  has suffered the least economic decline of the 15 states of the former
  USSR. With an authoritarian ex-Communist regime in power and a
  tribally based social structure, Turkmenistan has taken a cautious
  approach to questions of economic reform, using the profits from its
  gas and cotton exports to sustain a generally inefficient economy.
  Economic restructuring and privatization have just begun, and price
  liberalization and price increases have been accompanied by generous
  wage hikes and subsidies. At the same time, Turkmenistan faces serious
  constraints on its gas and oil earnings because of the inability of
  its traditional regional customers to pay for the current level of
  purchases and the lack of pipeline access to hard currency markets.
  Faced with financial shortfalls, rampant inflation, and the desire to
  ensure a stable currency, the regime has become more receptive to
  market reforms yet still seeks to offer widespread social benefits to
  its population and to retain state domination over the economy.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $13 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Turkmen statistics, which are very
  uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  7.8% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,330 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  45% per month (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  2.9% (1992 est.); includes only officially registered unemployed; also
  large number of underemployed
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $1.2 billion to states outside the FSU (1993)
commodities: 
  natural gas, cotton, petroleum products, textiles, carpets
partners: 
  Ukraine, Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Georgia, Eastern Europe,
  Turkey, Argentina
Imports: 
  $490 million from states outside the FSU (1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and parts, grain and food, plastics and rubber, consumer
  durables, textiles
partners: 
  Russia, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Turkey
External debt: 
  NEGL
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 5.3% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,920,000 kW
production: 
  13.1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  3,079 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  natural gas, oil, petroleum products, textiles, food processing
Agriculture: 
  cotton, grain, animal husbandry
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis and opium; mostly for CIS consumption;
  limited government eradication program; used as transshipment points
  for illicit drugs from Southwest Asia to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Turkmenistan has received about $200 million in bilateral aid credits
Currency: 
  Turkmenistan introduced its national currency, the manat, on 1
  November 1993
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Turkmenistan, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,120 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  23,000 km 
paved and gravel: 
  18,300 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 4,700 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 250 km; natural gas 4,400 km 
Ports: 
  inland - Krasnowodsk (Caspian Sea)
Airports: 
total: 
  7 
usable: 
  7 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  poorly developed; only 7.5 telephone circuits per 100 persons (1991);
  linked by cable and microwave to other CIS republics and to other
  countries by leased connections to the Moscow international gateway
  switch; a new telephone link from Ashgabat to Iran has been
  established; a new exchange in Ashgabat switches international traffic
  through Turkey via INTELSAT; satellite earth stations - 1 Orbita and 1
  INTELSAT

@Turkmenistan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Guard, Republic Security Forces (internal and border troops),
  Joint Command Turkmenistan/Russia (Ground, Navy or Caspian Sea
  Flotilla, Air, and Air Defense)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 962,987; fit for military service 787,991; reach
  military age (18) annually 40,079 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Turks and Caicos Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (dependent territory of the UK) 

@Turks and Caicos Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the western North Atlantic Ocean, 190 km north of the
  Dominican Republic and southeast of The Bahamas
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  430 sq km 
land area: 
  430 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  389 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; marine; moderated by trade winds; sunny and relatively dry
Terrain: 
  low, flat limestone; extensive marshes and mangrove swamps
Natural resources: 
  spiny lobster, conch 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  2% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  98% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km
Environment: 
current issues: 
  freshwater scarcity, private cisterns collect rainwater
natural hazards: 
  subject to frequent hurricanes
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  30 islands (eight inhabited)

@Turks and Caicos Islands, People

Population: 
  13,552 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.69% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  14.14 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.17 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  17.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.34 years 
male: 
  73.41 years 
female: 
  77.02 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.05 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  none 
adjective: 
  none 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 
Religions: 
  Baptist 41.2%, Methodist 18.9%, Anglican 18.3%, Seventh-Day Adventist
  1.7%, other 19.9% (1980)
Languages: 
  English (official)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over who have ever attended school (1970)
total population: 
  98% 
male: 
  99% 
female: 
  98% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  majority engaged in fishing and tourist industries; some subsistence
  agriculture

@Turks and Caicos Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Turks and Caicos Islands 
Digraph: 
  TK
Type: 
  dependent territory of the UK 
Capital: 
  Grand Turk 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Independence: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
National holiday: 
  Constitution Day, 30 August (1976) 
Constitution: 
  introduced 30 August 1976, suspended in 1986, restored and revised 5
  March 1988
Legal system: 
  based on laws of England and Wales with a small number adopted from
  Jamaica and The Bahamas
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1953), represented by Governor
  Martin BOURKE (since NA February 1993) 
head of government: 
  Chief Minister Washington MISSICK (since NA March 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Executive Council; consists of three ex-officio members and five
  appointed by the governor from the Legislative Council
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Council: 
  elections last held on 3 April 1991 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (20 total, 13 elected) PNP 8, PDM
  5
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Progressive National Party (PNP), Washington MISSICK; People's
  Democratic Movement (PDM), Oswald SKIPPINGS; National Democratic
  Alliance (NDA), Ariel MISSICK
Member of: 
  CARICOM (associate), CDB, INTERPOL (subbureau) 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (dependent territory of the UK)
Flag: 
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant and the
  colonial shield centered on the outer half of the flag; the shield is
  yellow and contains a conch shell, lobster, and cactus

@Turks and Caicos Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based on fishing, tourism, and offshore banking. Only
  subsistence farming - corn, cassava, citrus, and beans - exists on the
  Caicos Islands, so that most foods, as well as nonfood products, must
  be imported.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $80.8 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1.5% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $6,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  12% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $20.3 million 
expenditures: 
  $44 million, including capital expenditures of $23.9 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $6.8 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  lobster, dried and fresh conch, conch shells
partners: 
  US, UK
Imports: 
  $42.8 million (1992)
commodities: 
  food and beverages, tobacco, clothing, manufactures, construction
  materials
partners: 
  US, UK
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  9,050 kW
production: 
  11.1 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  860 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  fishing, tourism, offshore financial services
Agriculture: 
  subsistence farming prevails, based on corn and beans; fishing more
  important than farming; not self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $110 million 
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Turks and Caicos Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  121 km (including 24 km tarmac)
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Grand Turk, Salt Cay, Providenciales, Cockburn Harbour
Airports: 
total: 
  7 
usable: 
  7 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  fair cable and radio services; 1,446 telephones; broadcast stations -
  3 AM, no FM, several TV; 2 submarine cables; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT
  earth station

@Turks and Caicos Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the UK


@Tuvalu, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, 3,000 km east of Papua New Guinea in the South
  Pacific Ocean
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  26 sq km 
land area: 
  26 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  24 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to November);
  westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March)
Terrain: 
  very low-lying and narrow coral atolls
Natural resources: 
  fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  since there are no streams or rivers and groundwater is not potable,
  all water needs must be met by catchment systems with storage
  facilities
natural hazards: 
  severe tropical storms are rare
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the Sea

@Tuvalu, People

Population: 
  9,831 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.66% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.73 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.15 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  63.03 years 
male: 
  61.57 years 
female: 
  64.08 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.11 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Tuvaluans(s) 
adjective: 
  Tuvaluan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian 96% 
Religions: 
  Church of Tuvalu (Congregationalist) 97%, Seventh-Day Adventist 1.4%,
  Baha'i 1%, other 0.6% 
Languages: 
  Tuvaluan, English 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  NA

@Tuvalu, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Tuvalu 
former: 
  Ellice Islands 
Digraph: 
  TV
Type: 
  democracy; began debating republic status in 1992; referendum expected
  in 1993
Capital: 
  Funafuti 
Administrative divisions: 
  none
Independence: 
  1 October 1978 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 October (1978) 
Constitution: 
  1 October 1978
Legal system: 
  NA
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor
  General Tomu Malaefono SIONE (since NA 1993) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Kamuta LATASI (since 10 December 1993); Deputy Prime
  Minister Otinielu TAUSI (since 10 December 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the governor general on recommendation of the
  prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament (Palamene): 
  elections last held 25 November 1993 (next to be held by NA 1997);
  results - percent of vote NA; seats - (12 total)
Judicial branch: 
  High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Member of: 
  ACP, AsDB, C (special), ESCAP, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), ITU,
  SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Tuvalu has no mission in the US
US diplomatic representation: 
  none
Flag: 
  light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side quadrant;
  the outer half of the flag represents a map of the country with nine
  yellow five-pointed stars symbolizing the nine islands

@Tuvalu, Economy

Overview: 
  Tuvalu consists of a scattered group of nine coral atolls with poor
  soil. The country has no known mineral resources and few exports.
  Subsistence farming and fishing are the primary economic activities.
  The islands are too small and too remote for development of a tourist
  industry. Government revenues largely come from the sale of stamps and
  coins and worker remittances. Substantial income is received annually
  from an international trust fund established in 1987 by Australia, NZ,
  and the UK and supported also by Japan and South Korea.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $6.4 million (1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  4% (1990 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $700 (1990)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.9% (1989)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $4.3 million 
expenditures: 
  $4.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1989 est.)
Exports: 
  $165,000 (f.o.b., 1989)
commodities: 
  copra
partners: 
  Fiji, Australia, NZ
Imports: 
  $4.4 million (c.i.f., 1989)
commodities: 
  food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery, manufactured goods
partners: 
  Fiji, Australia, NZ
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,600 kW
production: 
  3 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  330 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  fishing, tourism, copra
Agriculture: 
  coconuts and fish
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-87), $1 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89),  $101
  million 
Currency: 
  1 Tuvaluan dollar ($T) or 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Tuvaluan dollars ($T) or Australian dollars ($A) per US$1 - 1.4364
  (January 1994), 1.4704 (1993), 1.3600 (1992), 1.2835 (1991), 1.2799
  (1990), 1.2618 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  NA

@Tuvalu, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  8 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 8 km 
Ports: 
  Funafuti, Nukufetau
Merchant marine: 
  7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 57,067 GRT/102,037 DWT, chemical
  tanker 4, oil tanker 2, passenger-cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  0 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV; 300 radiotelephones; 4,000
  radios; 108 telephones

@Tuvalu, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Police Force 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GNP


@Uganda, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Africa, between Kenya and Zaire
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  236,040 sq km 
land area: 
  199,710 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Oregon
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,698 km, Kenya 933 km, Rwanda 169 km, Sudan 435 km, Tanzania
  396 km, Zaire 765 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; generally rainy with two dry seasons (December to February,
  June to August); semiarid in northeast
Terrain: 
  mostly plateau with rim of mountains
Natural resources: 
  copper, cobalt, limestone, salt 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  23% 
permanent crops: 
  9% 
meadows and pastures: 
  25% 
forest and woodland: 
  30% 
other: 
  13% 
Irrigated land: 
  90 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  draining of wetlands for agricultural use; deforestation; overgrazing;
  soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Environmental
  Modification
Note: 
  landlocked

@Uganda, People

Population: 
  19,121,934 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.42% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  48.8 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  23.68 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  112.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  37.46 years 
male: 
  37.15 years 
female: 
  37.79 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.77 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ugandan(s) 
adjective: 
  Ugandan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Baganda 17%, Karamojong 12%, Basogo 8%, Iteso 8%, Langi 6%, Rwanda 6%,
  Bagisu 5%, Acholi 4%, Lugbara 4%, Bunyoro 3%, Batobo 3%, European,
  Asian, Arab 1%, other 23% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 33%, Protestant 33%, Muslim 16%, indigenous beliefs 18%
Languages: 
  English (official), Luganda, Swahili, Bantu languages, Nilotic
  languages 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  48% 
male: 
  62% 
female: 
  35% 
Labor force: 
  4.5 million (est.)
by occupation: 
  agriculture over 80%
note: 
  50% of population of working age (1983)

@Uganda, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Uganda 
conventional short form: 
  Uganda 
Digraph: 
  UG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Kampala 
Administrative divisions: 
  39 districts; Apac, Arua, Bundibugyo, Bushenyi, Gulu, Hoima, Iganga,
  Jinja, Kabale, Kabarole, Kalangala, Kampala, Kamuli, Kapchorwa,
  Kasese, Kibale, Kiboga, Kisoro, Kitgum, Kotido, Kumi, Lira, Luwero,
  Masaka, Masindi, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto, Moyo, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono,
  Nebbi, Ntungamo, Pallisa, Rakai, Rukungiri, Sototi, Tororo
Independence: 
  9 October 1962 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 9 October (1962) 
Constitution: 
  8 September 1967, in process of constitutional revision
Legal system: 
  government plans to restore system based on English common law and
  customary law and reinstitute a normal judicial system; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI (since 29 January 1986);
  Vice President Samson Babi Mululu KISEKKA (since NA January 1991) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister George Cosmas ADYEBO (since NA January 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Resistance Council: 
  elections last held 11-28 February 1989 (next to be held by January
  1995); results - NRM was the only party; seats - (278 total, 210
  indirectly elected) 210 members elected without party affiliation
Judicial branch: 
  Court of Appeal, High Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  only party - National Resistance Movement (NRM), Yoweri MUSEVENI
note: 
  Ugandan People's Congress (UPC), Milton OBOTE; Democratic Party (DP),
  Paul SSEMOGEERE; and Conservative Party (CP), Joshua S. MAYANJA-NKANGI
  continue to exist but are all proscribed from conducting public
  political activities
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Uganda People's Front (UPF); Lord's Resistance Army (LRA); Ruwenzori
  Movement
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB, ECA, FAO, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IGADD, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC,
  IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Stephen Kapimpina KATENTA-APULI 
chancery: 
  5909 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011 
telephone: 
  (202) 726-7100 through 7102 and 726-0416 
FAX: 
  (202) 726-1727 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Johnnie CARSON 
embassy: 
  Parliament Avenue, Kampala 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 7007, Kampala 
telephone: 
  [256] (41) 259792, 259793, 259795 
Flag: 
  six equal horizontal bands of black (top), yellow, red, black, yellow,
  and red; a white disk is superimposed at the center and depicts a
  red-crested crane (the national symbol) facing the staff side

@Uganda, Economy

Overview: 
  Uganda has substantial natural resources, including fertile soils,
  regular rainfall, and sizable mineral deposits of copper and cobalt.
  The economy has been devastated by widespread political instability,
  mismanagement, and civil war since independence in 1962. (GDP remains
  below the levels of the early 1970s, as does industrial production.)
  Agriculture is the most important sector of the economy, employing
  over 80% of the work force. Coffee is the major export crop and
  accounts for the bulk of export revenues. Since 1986 the government
  has acted to rehabilitate and stabilize the economy by undertaking
  currency reform, raising producer prices on export crops, increasing
  prices of petroleum products, and improving civil service wages. The
  policy changes are especially aimed at dampening inflation, which was
  running at over 300% in 1987, and boosting production and export
  earnings. In 1990-93, the economy has turned in a solid performance
  based on continued investment in the rehabilitation of infrastructure,
  improved incentives for production and exports, and gradually
  improving domestic security.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $24.1 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  41.5% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $365 million 
expenditures: 
  $545 million, including capital expenditures of $165 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $150 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  coffee 97%, cotton, tea
partners: 
  US 25%, UK 18%, France 11%, Spain 10%
Imports: 
  $513 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum products, machinery, cotton piece goods, metals,
  transportation equipment, food
partners: 
  Kenya 25%, UK 14%, Italy 13%
External debt: 
  $1.9 billion (1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 8% (1992 est.); accounts for 5% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  200,000 kW
production: 
  610 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  30 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  sugar, brewing, tobacco, cotton textiles, cement
Agriculture: 
  mainly subsistence; accounts for 57% of GDP and over 80% of labor
  force; cash crops - coffee, tea, cotton, tobacco; food crops -
  cassava, potatoes, corn, millet, pulses; livestock products - beef,
  goat meat, milk, poultry; self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (1970-89), $145 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $1.4
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $60 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $169 million 
Currency: 
  1 Ugandan shilling (USh) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Ugandan shillings (USh) per US$1 - 1,165.0 (November 1993), 1.133.8
  (1992), 734.0 (1991), 428.85 (1990), 223.1 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Uganda, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,300 km, 1.000-meter-gauge single track
Highways: 
total: 
  26,200 km 
paved: 
  1,970 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone 5,849 km; earth, tracks 18,381 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Lake Victoria, Lake Albert, Lake Kyoga, Lake George, Lake Edward;
  Victoria Nile, Albert Nile; principal inland water ports are at Jinja
  and Port Bell, both on Lake Victoria
Merchant marine: 
  3 roll-on/roll-off cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,091
  GRT/NA DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  31 
usable: 
  23 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  5 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  11 
Telecommunications: 
  fair system with microwave and radio communications stations;
  broadcast stations - 10 AM, no FM, 9 TV; satellite communications
  ground stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT

@Uganda, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Resistance Army (NRA); includes Air Force and Navy, Local
  Defense Units (LDU) 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,138,087; fit for military service 2,248,232 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $NA, 15% of budget (FY89/90)


@Ukraine, Geography

Location: 
  Eastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between Poland and Russia
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - European States, Europe,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  603,700 sq km 
land area: 
  603,700 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,558 km, Belarus 891 km, Hungary 103 km, Moldova 939 km, Poland
  428 km, Romania (southwest) 169 km, Romania (west) 362 km, Russia
  1,576 km, Slovakia 90 km 
Coastline: 
  2,782 km 
Maritime claims: 
  NA
International disputes: 
  potential future border disputes with Moldova and Romania in Northern
  Bukovina and southern Odes'ka Oblast'; potential dispute with Moldova
  over former southern Bessarabian area; potential dispute with Russia
  over Crimea; has made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but has
  reserved the right to do so) and does not recognize the claims of any
  other nation
Climate: 
  temperate continental; subtropical only on the southern Crimean coast;
  precipitation disproportionately distributed, highest in west and
  north, lesser in east and southeast; winters vary from cool along the
  Black Sea to cold farther inland; summers are warm across the greater
  part of the country, hot in the south
Terrain: 
  most of Ukraine consists of fertile plains (steppes) and plateaux,
  mountains being found only in the west (the Carpathians), and in the
  Crimean Peninsula in the extreme south
Natural resources: 
  iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil, salt, sulphur, graphite,
  titanium, magnesium, kaolin, nickel, mercury, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  56% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  12% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  30% 
Irrigated land: 
  26,000 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  unsafe drinking water; air and water pollution; deforestation;
  radiation contamination in the northeast from 1986 accident at
  Chornobyl' Nuclear Power Plant
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur, Antarctic Treaty, Environmental Modification,
  Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution; signed, but
  not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Law of the Sea
Note: 
  strategic position at the crossroads between Europe and Asia; second
  largest country in Europe

@Ukraine, People

Population: 
  51,846,958 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.05% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  12.34 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  12.6 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.71 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  20.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  69.99 years 
male: 
  65.45 years 
female: 
  74.76 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.82 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ukrainian(s) 
adjective: 
  Ukrainian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Ukrainian 73%, Russian 22%, Jewish 1%, other 4% 
Religions: 
  Ukrainian Orthodox - Moscow Patriarchate, Ukrainian Orthodox - Kiev
  Patriarchate, Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox, Ukrainian Catholic
  (Uniate), Protestant, Jewish 
Languages: 
  Ukrainian, Russian, Romanian, Polish, Hungarian 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1979)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  23.985 million 
by occupation: 
  industry and construction 33%, agriculture and forestry 21%, health,
  education, and culture 16%, trade and distribution 7%, transport and
  communication 7%, other 16% (1992)

@Ukraine, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Ukraine 
local long form: 
  none 
local short form: 
  Ukrayina 
former: 
  Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  UP
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Kiev (Kyyiv) 
Administrative divisions: 
  24 oblasti (singular - oblast'), 1 autonomous republic* (avtomnaya
  respublika), and 2 municipalites (mista, singular - misto) with oblast
  status**; Cherkas'ka (Cherkasy), Chernihivs'ka (Chernihiv),
  Chernivets'ka (Chernitsi), Dnipropetrovs'ka (Dnipropetrovs'k),
  Donets'ka (Donets'k), Ivano-Frankivs'ka (Ivano-Frankivs'k),
  Kharkivs'ka (Kharkiv), Khersons'ka (Kherson), Khmel'nyts'ka
  (Khmel'nyts'kyy), Kirovohrads'ka (Kirovohrad), Kyyiv**, Kyyivs'ka
  (Kiev), Luhans'ka (Luhans'k), L'vivs'ka (L'viv), Mykolayivs'ka
  (Mykolayiv), Odes'ka (Odesa), Poltavs'ka (Poltava), Respublika Krym*
  (Simferopol'), Rivnens'ka (Rivne), Sevastopol'**,Sums'ka
  (Sevastopol'), Ternopil's'ka (Ternopil'), Vinnyts'ka (Vinnytsya),
  Volyns'ka (Luts'k), Zakarpats'ka (Uzhhorod), Zaporiz'ka
  (Zaporizhzhya), Zhytomyrs'ka (Zhytomyr)
note: 
  names in parentheses are administrative centers when name differs from
  oblast' name
Independence: 
  1 December 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 24 August (1991) 
Constitution: 
  using 1978 pre-independence constitution; new constitution currently
  being drafted
Legal system: 
  based on civil law system; no judicial review of legislative acts
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President-elect Leonid D. KUCHMA; election last held 26 June and 10
  July 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); results - Leonid KUCHMA 52.15%,
  Leonid KRAVCHUK 45.06%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister (vacant); Acting First Deputy Prime Minister (and
  Acting Prime Minister since September 1993) Yukhym Leonidovych
  ZVYAHIL'SKYY (since 11 June 1993) and five deputy prime ministers 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president and approved by the
  Supreme Council
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme Council: 
  elections last held 27 March 1994 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote by party NA; seats - (450 total) number of seats by
  party NA; note - 338 deputies were elected; the remaining 112 seats to
  be filled on 24 July 1994
Judicial branch: 
  being organized
Political parties and leaders: 
  Green Party of Ukraine, Vitaliy KONONOV, leader; Liberal Party of
  Ukraine, Ihor MERKULOV, chairman; Liberal Democratic Party of Ukraine,
  Volodymyr KLYMCHUK, chairman; Democratic Party of Ukraine, Volodymyr
  Oleksandrovych YAVORIVSKIY, chairman; People's Party of Ukraine,
  Leopol'd TABURYANSKYY, chairman; Peasants' Party of Ukraine, Serhiy
  DOVGRAN', chairman; Party of Democratic Rebirth of Ukraine, Volodymyr
  FILENKO, chairman; Social Democratic Party of Ukraine, Yuriy ZBITNEV,
  chairman; Socialist Party of Ukraine, Oleksandr MOROZ, chairman;
  Ukrainian Christian Democratic Party, Vitaliy ZHURAVSKYY, chairman;
  Ukrainian Conservative Republican Party, Stepan KHMARA, chairman;
  Ukrainian Labor Party, Valentyn LANDYK, chairman; Ukrainian Party of
  Justice, Mykhaylo HRECHKO, chairman; Ukrainian Peasants' Democratic
  Party, Serhiy PLACHINDA, chairman; Ukrainian Republican Party,
  Mykhaylo HORYN', chairman; Ukrainian National Conservative Party,
  Viktor RADIONOV, chairman; Ukrainian People's Movement for
  Restructuring (Rukh), Vyacheslav CHORNOUL, chairman; Ukrainian
  Communist Party, Petr SYMONENKO
Other political or pressure groups: 
  New Ukraine (Nova Ukrayina); Congress of National Democratic Forces
Member of: 
  BSEC, CBSS (observer), CCC, CE (guest), CEI (participating), CIS,
  CSCE, EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ILO, IMF, INMARSAT, INTELSAT
  (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, NACC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNPROFOR, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Oleh Hryhorovych BILORUS 
chancery: 
  3350 M Street NW, Suite 200, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 333-0606 
FAX: 
  (202) 333-0817 
consulate(s) general: 
  Chicago and New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William MILLER 
embassy: 
  10 Yuria Kotsyubinskovo, 252053 Kiev 53 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [7] (044) 244-7349 or 244-7344 
FAX: 
  [7] (044) 244-7350 
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of azure (top) and golden yellow represent
  grainfields under a blue sky

@Ukraine, Economy

Overview: 
  After Russia, the Ukrainian republic was far and away the most
  important economic component of the former Soviet Union producing more
  than three times the output of the next-ranking republic. Its fertile
  black soil generated more than one-fourth of Soviet agricultural
  output, and its farms provided substantial quantities of meat, milk,
  grain and vegetables to other republics. Likewise, its diversified
  heavy industry supplied equipment and raw materials to industrial and
  mining sites in other regions of the former USSR. In 1992 the
  Ukrainian Government liberalized most prices and erected a legal
  framework for privatizing state enterprises while retaining many
  central economic controls and continuing subsidies to state production
  enterprises. In November 1992 the new Prime Minister KUCHMA launched a
  new economic reform program promising more freedom to the agricultural
  sector, faster privatization of small and medium enterprises, and
  stricter control over state subsidies. In 1993, however, severe
  internal political disputes over the scope and pace of economic reform
  and payment arrears on energy imports have led to further declines in
  output, and inflation of 50% or more per month by the last quarter. In
  first quarter 1994, national income and industrial output were less
  than two-thirds the first quarter 1993 figures, according to official
  statistics. At the same time an increasing number of people are
  developing small private businesses and exploiting opportunities in
  non-official markets. Even so, the magnitude of the problems and the
  slow pace in building new market-oriented institutions preclude a
  near-term recovery of output to the 1990 level. A vital economic
  concern in 1994 will continue to be Russia's decisions on the prices
  and quantities of oil and gas to be shipped to the Ukraine.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $205.4 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Ukrainian statistics, which are
  very uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -16% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,960 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  45% per month (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  0.4% officially registered; large number of unregistered or
  underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $3 billion to countries outside of the FSU (1993)
commodities: 
  coal, electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals, chemicals,
  machinery and transport equipment, grain, meat
partners: 
  FSU countries, Germany, China, Austria
Imports: 
  $2.2 billion from outside of the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  machinery and parts, transportation equipment, chemicals, textiles
partners: 
  FSU countries, Germany, China, Austria
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -14% (1993); accounts for 50% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  55,882,000 kW
production: 
  281 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,410 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  coal, electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals, machinery and
  transport equipment, chemicals, food-processing (especially sugar)
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 25% of GDP; grain, vegetables, meat, milk, sugar
  beets
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for CIS
  consumption; limited government eradication program; used as
  transshipment points for illicit drugs to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
  $350 million economic aid and $350 million to help disassemble the
  atomic weapons from the US in 1994
Currency: 
  Ukraine withdrew the Russian ruble from circulation on 12 November
  1992 and declared the karbovanets (plural karbovantsi) sole legal
  tender in Ukrainian markets; Ukrainian officials claim this is an
  interim move toward introducing a new currency - the hryvnya -
  possibly in mid-1994
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Ukraine, Communications

Railroads: 
  23,350 km (1,524-mm gauge); 8,600 km electrified
Highways: 
total: 
  273,700 km 
paved and gravel: 
  236,400 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 37,300 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,672 km perennially navigable (Pryp''yat' and Dnipro Rivers)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 2,010 km; petroleum products 1,920 km; natural gas 7,800 km
  (1992)
Ports: 
  coastal - Berdyans'k, Illichivs'k, Kerch, Kherson, Mariupol',
  Mykolayiv, Odesa, Sevastopol', Pivdenne; inland - Kiev (Kyyiv)
Merchant marine: 
  390 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,932,009 GRT/5,236,134 DWT,
  barge carriers 7, bulk cargo 55, cargo 231, chemical tanker 2,
  container 18, liquefied gas 1, multi-function-large-load-carrier 1,
  oil tanker 10, passenger 12, passenger cargo 5, railcar carrier 2,
  refrigerated cargo 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 33, short-sea passenger 8
Airports: 
total: 
  694 
usable: 
  199 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  111 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  81 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  78 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  the telephone system is inadequate both for business and for personal
  use; about 7,886,000 telephone circuits serve 52,056,000 people
  (1991); telephone density is 151.4 telephone circuits per 1,000
  persons (1991); 3.56 million applications for telephones had not been
  satisfied as of January 1991; calls to other CIS countries are carried
  by land line or microwave; other international calls to 167 countries
  are carried by satellite or by the 150 leased lines through the Moscow
  gateway switch; an NMT-450 analog cellular telephone network operates
  in Kiev (Kyyiv) and allows direct dialing of international calls
  through Kiev's EWSD digital exchange; electronic mail services have
  been established in Kiev, Odessa, and Lugansk by Sprint; satellite
  earth stations employ INTELSAT, INMARSAT, and Intersputnik

@Ukraine, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Republic Security Forces
  (internal and border troops), National Guard 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 12,191,984; fit for military service 9,591,276; reach
  military age (18) annually 364,676 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  544,256 million karbovantsi, NA% of GDP (forecast for 1993); note -
  conversion of the military budget into US dollars using the current
  exchange rate could produce misleading results


@United Arab Emirates, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, along the Persian Gulf, between Oman and Saudi Arabia
Map references: 
  Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  75,581 sq km 
land area: 
  75,581 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Maine
Land boundaries: 
  total 867 km, Oman 410 km, Saudi Arabia 457 km 
Coastline: 
  1,318 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  defined by bilateral boundaries or equidistant line
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  3 nm assumed for most of country; 12 nm for Ash Shariqah (Sharjah)
International disputes: 
  location and status of boundary with Saudi Arabia is not final; no
  defined boundary with most of Oman, but Administrative Line in far
  north; claims two islands in the Persian Gulf occupied by Iran
  (Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg or Greater Tunb, and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e
  Kuchek or Lesser Tunb); claims island in the Persian Gulf jointly
  administered with Iran (Jazireh-ye Abu Musa or Abu Musa); in 1992, the
  dispute over Abu Musa and the Tunb islands became more acute when Iran
  unilaterally tried to control the entry of third country nationals
  into the UAE portion of Abu Musa island, Tehran subsequently backed
  off in the face of significant diplomatic support for the UAE in the
  region
Climate: 
  desert; cooler in eastern mountains
Terrain: 
  flat, barren coastal plain merging into rolling sand dunes of vast
  desert wasteland; mountains in east
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  2% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  98% 
Irrigated land: 
  50 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lack of natural freshwater resources being overcome by desalination
  plants; desertification; beach pollution from oil spills
natural hazards: 
  frequent dust and sand storms
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Ozone
  Layer Protection; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the
  Sea
Note: 
  strategic location along southern approaches to Strait of Hormuz, a
  vital transit point for world crude oil

@United Arab Emirates, People

Population: 
  2,791,141 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  4.79% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  27.68 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  3.05 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  23.31 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  21.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  72.26 years 
male: 
  70.16 years 
female: 
  74.46 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.6 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Emirian(s) 
adjective: 
  Emirian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Emirian 19%, other Arab 23%, South Asian 50%, other expatriates
  (includes Westerners and East Asians) 8% (1982)
note: 
  less than 20% are UAE citizens (1982)
Religions: 
  Muslim 96% (Shi'a 16%), Christian, Hindu, and other 4% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), Persian, English, Hindi, Urdu 
Literacy: 
  age 10 and over but definition of literacy not available (1980)
total population: 
  68% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  63% 
Labor force: 
  580,000 (1986 est.)
by occupation: 
  industry and commerce 85%, agriculture 5%, services 5%, government 5%
note: 
  80% of labor force is foreign (est.)

@United Arab Emirates, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  United Arab Emirates 
conventional short form: 
  none 
local long form: 
  Al Imarata al Arabiyah al Muttahidah 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Trucial States 
Abbreviation: 
  UAE 
Digraph: 
  TC
Type: 
  federation with specified powers delegated to the UAE central
  government and other powers reserved to member emirates
Capital: 
  Abu Dhabi 
Administrative divisions: 
  7 emirates (imarat, singular - imarah); Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi), 'Ajman,
  Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah (Sharjah), Dubayy, Ra's al Khaymah, Umm al
  Qaywayn
Independence: 
  2 December 1971 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 2 December (1971) 
Constitution: 
  2 December 1971 (provisional)
Legal system: 
  secular codes are being introduced by the UAE Government and in
  several member emirates; Islamic law remains influential
Suffrage: 
  none
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan, (since 2 December 1971), ruler
  of Abu Dhabi; Vice President Shaykh Maktum bin Rashid al-MAKTUM (since
  8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Shaykh MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum (since 8 October
  1990), ruler of Dubayy; Deputy Prime Minister Sultan bin Zayid Al
  NUHAYYAN (since 20 November 1990) 
Supreme Council of Rulers: 
  composed of the seven emirate rulers, the council is the highest
  constitutional authority in the UAE; establishes general policies and
  sanctions federal legislation, Abu Dhabi and Dubayy rulers have veto
  power; council meets four times a year
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral Federal National Council (Majlis Watani Itihad); no
  elections
Judicial branch: 
  Union Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  none
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GATT, GCC, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOSOM, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Muhammad bin Husayn al-SHAALI 
chancery: 
  Suite 600, 3000 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 338-6500 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William A. RUGH 
embassy: 
  Al-Sudan Street, Abu Dhabi 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 4009, Abu Dhabi 
telephone: 
  [971] (2) 336691 
FAX: 
  [971] (2) 318441 
consulate(s) general: 
  Dubayy (Dubai) 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and black with a
  thicker vertical red band on the hoist side

@United Arab Emirates, Economy

Overview: 
  The UAE has an open economy with one of the world's highest incomes
  per capita and with a sizable annual trade surplus. Its wealth is
  based on oil and gas output (about 40% of GDP), and the fortunes of
  the economy fluctuate with the prices of those commodities. Since
  1973, the UAE has undergone a profound transformation from an
  impoverished region of small desert principalities to a modern state
  with a high standard of living. At present levels of production, crude
  oil reserves should last for over 100 years. Although much stronger
  economically than most Gulf states, the UAE faces similar problems
  with weak international oil prices and the pressures for cuts in OPEC
  oil production quotas. The UAE government is encouraging increased
  privatization within the economy.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $63.8 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $24,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3.5% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NEGL% (1988)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $4.3 billion 
expenditures: 
  $4.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est)
Exports: 
  $22.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil 66%, natural gas, re-exports, dried fish, dates
partners: 
  Japan 39%, Singapore 5%, Korea 4%, Iran 4%, India 4% (1991)
Imports: 
  $18 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment, food
partners: 
  Japan 14%, UK 9%, US 8%, Germany 6% (1992)
External debt: 
  $11 billion (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 1.7% (1992 est.); accounts for 50% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,090,000 kW
production: 
  17.85 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  6,718 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, fishing, petrochemicals, construction materials, some boat
  building, handicrafts, pearling
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 2% of GDP and 5% of labor force; cash crop - dates; food
  products - vegetables, watermelons, poultry, eggs, dairy, fish; only
  25% self-sufficient in food
Illicit drugs: 
  growing role as heroin transshipment and money-laundering center
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  pledged  in bilateral aid to less developed countries (1979-89) $9.1
  billion 
Currency: 
  1 Emirian dirham (Dh) = 100 fils
Exchange rates: 
  Emirian dirhams (Dh) per US$1 - 3.6710 (fixed rate)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@United Arab Emirates, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,000 km 
paved: 
  1,800 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, graded earth 200 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 830 km; natural gas, including natural gas liquids, 870 km 
Ports: 
  Al Fujayrah, Khawr Fakkan, Mina' Jabal 'Ali, Mina' Khalid, Mina'
  Rashid, Mina' Saqr, Mina' Zayid
Merchant marine: 
  57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 909,041 GRT/1,512,741 DWT, bulk
  1, cargo 18, chemical tanker 2, container 9, liquified gas 1, oil
  tanker 22, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3 
Airports: 
total: 
  39 
usable: 
  36 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  22 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  6 
Telecommunications: 
  modern system consisting of microwave and coaxial cable; key centers
  are Abu Dhabi and Dubayy; 386,600 telephones; satellite ground
  stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 2 Indian Ocean INTELSAT and 1
  ARABSAT; submarine cables to Qatar, Bahrain, India, and Pakistan;
  tropospheric scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio relay to Saudi
  Arabia; broadcast stations - 8 AM, 3 FM, 12 TV

@United Arab Emirates, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Federal Police Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,040,828; fit for military service 567,766; reach
  military age (18) annually 17,303 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.47 billion, 5.3% of GDP (1989 est.)


@United Kingdom, Geography

Location: 
  Western Europe, bordering on the North Atlantic Ocean and the North
  Sea, between Ireland and France
Map references: 
  Europe, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  244,820 sq km 
land area: 
  241,590 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Oregon
note: 
  includes Rockall and Shetland Islands
Land boundaries: 
  total 360 km, Ireland 360 km 
Coastline: 
  12,429 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  as defined in continental shelf orders or in accordance with agreed
  upon boundaries
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Northern Ireland question with Ireland; Gibraltar question with Spain;
  Argentina claims Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas); Argentina claims
  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands; Mauritius claims island
  of Diego Garcia in British Indian Ocean Territory; Rockall continental
  shelf dispute involving Denmark, Iceland, and Ireland (Ireland and the
  UK have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area); territorial
  claim in Antarctica (British Antarctic Territory)
Climate: 
  temperate; moderated by prevailing southwest winds over the North
  Atlantic Current; more than half of the days are overcast
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged hills and low mountains; level to rolling plains in east
  and southeast
Natural resources: 
  coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay,
  chalk, gypsum, lead, silica 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  29% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  48% 
forest and woodland: 
  9% 
other: 
  14% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,570 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  sulfur dioxide emissions from power plants contribute to air
  pollution; some rivers polluted by agricultural wastes and coastal
  waters polluted because of large-scale disposal of sewage at sea
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Antarctic
  Treaty, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber, Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not
  ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity
Note: 
  lies near vital North Atlantic sea lanes; only 35 km from France and
  now linked by tunnel under the English Channel; because of heavily
  indented coastline, no location is more than 125 km from tidal waters

@United Kingdom, People

Population: 
  58,135,110 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.28% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  13.39 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  10.76 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  76.75 years 
male: 
  73.94 years 
female: 
  79.69 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  1.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Briton(s), British (collective pl.) 
adjective: 
  British 
Ethnic divisions: 
  English 81.5%, Scottish 9.6%, Irish 2.4%, Welsh 1.9%, Ulster 1.8%,
  West Indian, Indian, Pakistani, and other 2.8% 
Religions: 
  Anglican 27 million, Roman Catholic 9 million, Muslim 1 million,
  Presbyterian 800,000, Methodist 760,000, Sikh 400,000, Hindu 350,000,
  Jewish 300,000 (1991 est.)
note: 
  the UK does not include a question on religion in its census
Languages: 
  English, Welsh (about 26% of the population of Wales), Scottish form
  of Gaelic (about 60,000 in Scotland)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1978 est.)
total population: 
  99% 
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  28.048 million 
by occupation: 
  services 62.8%, manufacturing and construction 25.0%, government 9.1%,
  energy 1.9%, agriculture 1.2% (June 1992)

@United Kingdom, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
conventional short form: 
  United Kingdom 
Abbreviation: 
  UK 
Digraph: 
  UK
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy 
Capital: 
  London 
Administrative divisions: 
  47 counties, 7 metropolitan counties, 26 districts, 9 regions, and 3
  islands areas
England: 
  39 counties, 7 metropolitan counties*; Avon, Bedford, Berkshire,
  Buckingham, Cambridge, Cheshire, Cleveland, Cornwall, Cumbria, Derby,
  Devon, Dorset, Durham, East Sussex, Essex, Gloucester, Greater
  London*, Greater Manchester*, Hampshire, Hereford and Worcester,
  Hertford, Humberside, Isle of Wight, Kent, Lancashire, Leicester,
  Lincoln, Merseyside*, Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland, North
  Yorkshire, Nottingham, Oxford, Shropshire, Somerset, South Yorkshire*,
  Stafford, Suffolk, Surrey, Tyne and Wear*, Warwick, West Midlands*,
  West Sussex, West Yorkshire*, Wiltshire
Northern Ireland: 
  26 districts; Antrim, Ards, Armagh, Ballymena, Ballymoney, Banbridge,
  Belfast, Carrickfergus, Castlereagh, Coleraine, Cookstown, Craigavon,
  Down, Dungannon, Fermanagh, Larne, Limavady, Lisburn, Londonderry,
  Magherafelt, Moyle, Newry and Mourne, Newtownabbey, North Down, Omagh,
  Strabane
Scotland: 
  9 regions, 3 islands areas*; Borders, Central, Dumfries and Galloway,
  Fife, Grampian, Highland, Lothian, Orkney*, Shetland*, Strathclyde,
  Tayside, Western Isles*
Wales: 
  8 counties; Clwyd, Dyfed, Gwent, Gwynedd, Mid Glamorgan, Powys, South
  Glamorgan, West Glamorgan
Dependent areas: 
  Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin
  Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey, Hong
  Kong (scheduled to become a Special Administrative Region of China on
  1 July 1997), Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint
  Helena, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos
  Islands 
Independence: 
  1 January 1801 (United Kingdom established)
National holiday: 
  Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen (second Saturday in June) 
Constitution: 
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and practice
Legal system: 
  common law tradition with early Roman and modern continental
  influences; no judicial review of Acts of Parliament; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); Heir Apparent Prince
  CHARLES (son of the Queen, born 14 November 1948) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister John MAJOR (since 28 November 1990) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Parliament
House of Lords: 
  consists of a 1,200-member body, four-fifths are hereditary peers, 2
  archbishops, 24 other senior bishops, serving and retired Lords of
  Appeal in Ordinary, other life peers, Scottish peers
House of Commons: 
  elections last held 9 April 1992 (next to be held by NA April 1997);
  results - Conservative 41.9%, Labor 34.5%, Liberal Democratic 17.9%,
  other 5.7%; seats - (651 total) Conservative 336, Labor 271, Liberal
  Democratic 20, other 24
Judicial branch: 
  House of Lords 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Conservative and Unionist Party, John MAJOR; Labor Party; Liberal
  Democrats (LD), Jeremy (Paddy) ASHDOWN; Scottish National Party, Alex
  SALMOND; Welsh National Party (Plaid Cymru), Dafydd Iwan WIGLEY;
  Ulster Unionist Party (Northern Ireland), James MOLYNEAUX; Democratic
  Unionist Party (Northern Ireland), Rev. Ian PAISLEY; Ulster Popular
  Unionist Party (Northern Ireland), Sir James KILFEDDER; Social
  Democratic and Labor Party (SDLP, Northern Ireland), John HUME; Sinn
  Fein (Northern Ireland), Gerry ADAMS
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Trades Union Congress; Confederation of British Industry; National
  Farmers' Union; Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), AsDB, Australian Group, BIS, C, CCC, CDB
  (non-regional), CE, CERN, COCOM, CSCE, EBRD, EC, ECA (associate), ECE,
  ECLAC, EIB, ESCAP, ESA, FAO, G-5, G-7, G-10, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, MINURSO,
  MTRC, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, PCA, SPC, UN, UNCTAD, UNFICYP,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNPROFOR, UNRWA, UN Security Council, UNTAC, UN
  Trusteeship Council, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, ZC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Sir Robin RENWICK 
chancery: 
  3100 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 462-1340 
FAX: 
  (202) 898-4255 
consulate(s) general: 
  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Houston, Los Angeles, New York,
  and San Francisco, 
consulate(s): 
  Dallas, Miami, Nuku'alofa, and Seattle 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador-designate Adm. William CROWE 
embassy: 
  24/31 Grosvenor Square, London, W.1A1AE 
mailing address: 
  PSC 801, Box 40, FPO AE 09498-4040 
telephone: 
  [44] (71) 499-9000 
FAX: 
  [44] (71) 409-1637 
consulate(s) general: 
  Belfast and Edinburgh 
Flag: 
  blue with the red cross of Saint George (patron saint of England)
  edged in white superimposed on the diagonal red cross of Saint Patrick
  (patron saint of Ireland) which is superimposed on the diagonal white
  cross of Saint Andrew (patron saint of Scotland); known as the Union
  Flag or Union Jack; the design and colors (especially the Blue Ensign)
  have been the basis for a number of other flags including
  dependencies, Commonwealth countries, and others

@United Kingdom, Economy

Overview: 
  The UK is one of the world's great trading powers and financial
  centers, and its economy ranks among the four largest in Western
  Europe. The economy is essentially capitalistic; over the past
  thirteen years the ruling Tories have greatly reduced public ownership
  and contained the growth of social welfare programs. Agriculture is
  intensive, highly mechanized, and efficient by European standards,
  producing about 60% of food needs with only 1% of the labor force. The
  UK has large coal, natural gas, and oil reserves, and primary energy
  production accounts for 12% of GDP, one of the highest shares of any
  industrial nation. Services, particularly banking, insurance, and
  business services, account by far for the largest proportion of GDP
  while industry continues to decline in importance, now employing only
  25% of the work force and generating only 21% of GDP. The economy is
  emerging out of its 3-year recession with only weak recovery in 1993;
  even so, the economy fared better in 1993 than the economies of most
  other European countries. Unemployment is hovering around 10% of the
  labor force. The government in 1992 adopted a pro-growth strategy,
  cutting interest rates sharply and removing the pound from the
  European exchange rate mechanism. Excess industrial capacity probably
  will moderate inflation which for the first time in a decade is below
  the EC average. The major economic policy question for Britain in the
  1990s is the terms on which it participates in the financial and
  economic integration of Europe.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $980.2 billion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  2.1% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $16,900 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.6% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  10.3% (1993)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $325.5 billion 
expenditures: 
  $400.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $33 billion (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $190.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, machinery, fuels, chemicals, semifinished goods,
  transport equipment
partners: 
  EC countries 56.7% (Germany 14.0%, France 11.1%, Netherlands 7.9%), US
  10.9%
Imports: 
  $221.6 billion (c.i.f., 1993)
commodities: 
  manufactured goods, machinery, semifinished goods, foodstuffs,
  consumer goods
partners: 
  EC countries 51.7% (Germany 14.9%, France 9.3%, Netherlands 8.4%), US
  11.6%
External debt: 
  $16.2 billion (June 1992)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.2% (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  99,000,000 kW
production: 
  317 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,480 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  production machinery including machine tools, electric power
  equipment, equipment for the automation of production, railroad
  equipment, shipbuilding, aircraft, motor vehicles and parts,
  electronics and communications equipment, metals, chemicals, coal,
  petroleum, paper and paper products, food processing, textiles,
  clothing, and other consumer goods
Agriculture: 
  accounts for only 1.5% of GDP and 1% of labor force; highly mechanized
  and efficient farms; wide variety of crops and livestock products
  produced; about 60% self-sufficient in food and feed needs
Illicit drugs: 
  gateway country for Latin American cocaine entering the European
  market; producer of synthetic drugs; money-laundering center
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  ODA and OOF commitments (1992-93), $3.2 billion 
Currency: 
  1 British pound (#) = 100 pence
Exchange rates: 
  British pounds (#) per US$1 - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6033 (1993),
  0.5664 (1992), 0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 April-31 March

@United Kingdom, Communications

Railroads: 
  UK, 16,914 km total; Great Britain's British Railways (BR) operates
  16,584 km 1,435-mm (standard) gauge (including 4,545 km electrified
  and 12,591 km double or multiple track), several additional small
  standard-gauge and narrow-gauge lines are privately owned and
  operated; Northern Ireland Railways (NIR) operates 330 km 1,600-mm
  gauge (including 190 km double track)
Highways: 
total: 
  362,982 km (Great Britian 339,483 km; Northern Ireland 23,499 km)
paved: 
  362,390 km (Great Britian 339,483 km, including 2,573 km limited
  access divided highway; Northern Ireland 22,907 km)
unpaved: 
  gravel 592 km (in Northern Ireland)
Inland waterways: 
  2,291 total; British Waterways Board, 606 km; Port Authorities, 706
  km; other, 979 km
Pipelines: 
  crude oil (almost all insignificant) 933 km; petroleum products 2,993
  km; natural gas 12,800 km 
Ports: 
  London, Liverpool, Felixstowe, Tees and Hartlepool, Dover, Sullom Voe,
  Southampton
Merchant marine: 
  180 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,428,571 GRT/4,297,489 DWT,
  bulk 17, cargo 35, chemical tanker 2, combination bulk 1, container
  24, liquefied gas 5, oil tanker 59, passenger 7, passenger cargo 1,
  refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 13, short-sea passenger
  14, specialized tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  497 
usable: 
  388 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  251 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  37 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  133 
Telecommunications: 
  technologically advanced domestic and international system; 30,200,000
  telephones; equal mix of buried cables, microwave and optical-fiber
  systems; excellent countrywide broadcast systems; broadcast stations -
  225 AM, 525 (mostly repeaters) FM, 207 (3,210 repeaters) TV; 40
  coaxial submarine cables; 5 satellite ground stations operating in
  INTELSAT (7 Atlantic Ocean and 3 Indian Ocean), INMARSAT, and EUTELSAT
  systems; at least 8 large international switching centers

@United Kingdom, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Royal Navy (including Royal Marines), Royal Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 14,432,081; fit for military service 12,056,828 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $34.8 billion, 3.7% of GDP (FY93/94)


@United States, Geography

Location: 
  North America, between Canada and Mexico
Map references: 
  North America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  9,372,610 sq km 
land area: 
  9,166,600 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about half the size of Russia; about three-tenths the size of Africa;
  about one-half the size of South America (or slightly larger than
  Brazil); slightly smaller than China; about two and one-half times the
  size of Western Europe
note: 
  includes only the 50 states and District of Columbia
Land boundaries: 
  total 12,248 km, Canada 8,893 km (including 2,477 km with Alaska),
  Cuba 29 km (US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay), Mexico 3,326 km 
Coastline: 
  19,924 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm depth
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary disputes with Canada (Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea,
  Strait of Juan de Fuca); US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased
  from Cuba and only mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can
  terminate the lease; Haiti claims Navassa Island; US has made no
  territorial claim in Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so)
  and does not recognize the claims of any other nation; Republic of
  Marshall Islands claims Wake Island
Climate: 
  mostly temperate, but tropical in Hawaii and Florida and arctic in
  Alaska, semiarid in the great plains west of the Mississippi River and
  arid in the Great Basin of the southwest; low winter temperatures in
  the northwest are ameliorated occasionally in January and February by
  warm chinook winds from the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains
Terrain: 
  vast central plain, mountains in west, hills and low mountains in
  east; rugged mountains and broad river valleys in Alaska; rugged,
  volcanic topography in Hawaii
Natural resources: 
  coal, copper, lead, molybdenum, phosphates, uranium, bauxite, gold,
  iron, mercury, nickel, potash, silver, tungsten, zinc, petroleum,
  natural gas, timber 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  20% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  26% 
forest and woodland: 
  29% 
other: 
  25% 
Irrigated land: 
  181,020 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  air pollution resulting in acid rain in both the US and Canada; the US
  is the largest single emitter of carbon dioxide from the burning of
  fossil fuels; water pollution from runoff of pesticides and
  fertilizers; sparse water resources in much of the western part of the
  country requires careful management; desertification
natural hazards: 
  tsunamis, volcanoes, and earthquake activity around Pacific Basin;
  hurricanes along the Atlantic coast; tornadoes in the midwest;
  mudslides in California; forest fires in the west; flooding;
  permafrost in northern Alaska is a major impediment to development
international agreements: 
  party to - Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Antarctic
  Treaty, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber,
  Wetlands, Whaling; signed, but not ratified - Air Pollution-Volatile
  Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity,
  Hazardous Wastes
Note: 
  world's fourth-largest country (after Russia, Canada, and China)

@United States, People

Population: 
  260,713,585 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.99% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  15.2 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  8.68 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  3.38 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  8.11 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.9 years 
male: 
  72.58 years 
female: 
  79.39 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.06 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  American(s) 
adjective: 
  American 
Ethnic divisions: 
  white 83.4%, black 12.4%, Asian 3.3%, Native American 0.8% (1992)
Religions: 
  Protestant 56%, Roman Catholic 28%, Jewish 2%, other 4%, none 10%
  (1989)
Languages: 
  English, Spanish (spoken by a sizable minority)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over having completed 5 or more years of schooling (1991)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  97% 
Labor force: 
  129.525 million (includes armed forces and unemployed); civilian labor
  force 128.040 million) (1993)
by occupation: 
  managerial and professional 27.1%; technical, sales and administrative
  support 30.9%; services 13.8%; manufacturing, mining, transportation,
  and crafts 25.5%; farming, forestry, and fishing 2.8%

@United States, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  United States of America 
conventional short form: 
  United States 
Abbreviation: 
  US or USA 
Digraph: 
  US
Type: 
  federal republic; strong democratic tradition
Capital: 
  Washington, DC 
Administrative divisions: 
  50 states and 1 district*; Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas,
  California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia*,
  Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
  Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
  Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
  Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, North
  Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South
  Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia,
  Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming
Dependent areas: 
  American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island, Jarvis Island,
  Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa Island, Northern
  Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Wake
  Island 
note: 
  since 18 July 1947, the US has administered the Trust Territory of the
  Pacific Islands, but recently entered into a new political
  relationship with three of the four political units; the Northern
  Mariana Islands is a Commonwealth in political union with the US
  (effective 3 November 1986); Palau concluded a Compact of Free
  Association with the US that was approved by the US Congress but to
  date the Compact process has not been completed in Palau, which
  continues to be administered by the US as the Trust Territory of the
  Pacific Islands; the Federated States of Micronesia signed a Compact
  of Free Association with the US (effective 3 November 1986); the
  Republic of the Marshall Islands signed a Compact of Free Association
  with the US (effective 21 October 1986)
Independence: 
  4 July 1776 (from England)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 4 July (1776) 
Constitution: 
  17 September 1787, effective 4 March 1789
Legal system: 
  based on English common law; judicial review of legislative acts;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January 1993); Vice
  President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993); election last held
  3 November 1992 (next to be held 5 November 1996); results - William
  Jefferson CLINTON (Democratic Party) 43.2%, George BUSH (Republican
  Party) 37.7%, Ross PEROT (Independent) 19.0%, other 0.1%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president with Senate approval
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Congress
Senate: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held 8 November 1994);
  results - Democratic Party 53%, Republican Party 47%, other NEGL%;
  seats - (100 total) Democratic Party 57, Republican Party 43
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held 8 November 1994);
  results - Democratic Party 52%, Republican Party 46%, other 2%; seats
  - (435 total) Democratic Party 258, Republican Party 176, Independent
  1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Republican Party, Haley BARBOUR, national committee chairman; Jeanie
  AUSTIN, co-chairman; Democratic Party, David C. WILHELM, national
  committee chairman; several other groups or parties of minor political
  significance
Member of: 
  AfDB, AG (observer), ANZUS, APEC, AsDB, Australian Group, BIS, CCC,
  COCOM, CP, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, FAO, ESCAP, G-2, G-5, G-7, G-8,
  G-10, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  LORCS, MINURSO, MTCR, NACC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS, OECD, PCA, SPC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNOSOM, UNRWA, UN Security Council,
  UNTAC, UN Trusteeship Council, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO,
  ZC 
Flag: 
  thirteen equal horizontal stripes of red (top and bottom) alternating
  with white; there is a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side corner
  bearing 50 small white five-pointed stars arranged in nine offset
  horizontal rows of six stars (top and bottom) alternating with rows of
  five stars; the 50 stars represent the 50 states, the 13 stripes
  represent the 13 original colonies; known as Old Glory; the design and
  colors have been the basis for a number of other flags including
  Chile, Liberia, Malaysia, and Puerto Rico

@United States, Economy

Overview: 
  The US has the most powerful, diverse, and technologically advanced
  economy in the world, with a per capita GDP of $24,700, the largest
  among major industrial nations. The economy is market oriented with
  most decisions made by private individuals and business firms and with
  government purchases of goods and services made predominantly in the
  marketplace. In 1989 the economy enjoyed its seventh successive year
  of substantial growth, the longest in peacetime history. The expansion
  featured moderation in wage and consumer price increases and a steady
  reduction in unemployment to 5.2% of the labor force. In 1990,
  however, growth slowed to 1% because of a combination of factors, such
  as the worldwide increase in interest rates, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
  in August, the subsequent spurt in oil prices, and a general decline
  in business and consumer confidence. In 1991 output fell by 1%,
  unemployment grew, and signs of recovery proved premature. Growth
  picked up to 2.6% in 1992 and to 3.0% in 1993. Unemployment, however,
  declined only gradually, the increase in GDP being mainly attributable
  to gains in output per worker. Ongoing economic problems for the
  remainder of the 1990s include inadequate investment in economic
  infrastructure, rapidly rising medical costs, and sizable budget and
  trade deficits.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $6.379 trillion (1993)
National product real growth rate: 
  3% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $24,700 (1993)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  3% (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  6% (May 1994)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.1535 trillion 
expenditures: 
  $1.4082 trillion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1993 est.)
Exports: 
  $449 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  capital goods, automobiles, industrial supplies and raw materials,
  consumer goods, agricultural products
partners: 
  Western Europe 24.3%, Canada 22.1%, Japan 10.5% (1993 est.)
Imports: 
  $582 billion (c.i.f., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil and refined petroleum products, machinery, automobiles,
  consumer goods, industrial raw materials, food and beverages
partners: 
  Canada, 19.3%, Western Europe 18.1%, Japan 18.1% (1993 est.)
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.6% (1993); accounts for 23% of GDP (1991)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  780,000,000 kW
production: 
  3.23 trillion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  12,690 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  leading industrial power in the world, highly diversified and
  technologically advanced; petroleum, steel, motor vehicles, aerospace,
  telecommunications, chemicals, electronics, food processing, consumer
  goods, lumber, mining
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 2% of GDP and 2.8% of labor force; favorable climate and
  soils support a wide variety of crops and livestock production;
  world's second largest producer and number one exporter of grain;
  surplus food producer; fish catch of 4.4 million metric tons (1990)
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis for domestic consumption with 1987
  production estimated at 3,500 metric tons or about 25% of the
  available marijuana; ongoing eradication program aimed at small plots
  and greenhouses has not reduced production
Economic aid: 
donor: 
  commitments, including ODA and OOF, (FY80-89), $115.7 billion 
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
British pounds: 
  (#) per US$ - 0.6699 (January 1994), 0.6033 (1993), 0.5664 (1992),
  0.5652 (1991), 0.5603 (1990), 0.6099 (1989)
Canadian dollars: 
  (Can$) per US$ - 1.3174 (January 1994), 1.2901 (1993), 1.2087 (1992),
  1.1457 (1991), 1.1668 (1990), 1.1840 (1989)
French francs: 
  (F) per US$ - 5.9205 (January 1994), 5.6632 (1993), 5.2938 (1992),
  5.6421 (1991), 5.4453 (1990), 6.3801 (1989)
Italian lire: 
  (Lit) per US$ - 1,700.2 (January 1994), 1,573.7 (1993), 1,232.4
  (1992), 1,240.6 (1991), 1,198.1 (1990), 1.372.1 (1989)
Japanese yen: 
  (Y) per US$ - 111.51 (January 1994), 111.20 (1993), 126.65 (1992),
  134.71 (1991), 144.79 (1990), 137.96 (1989)
German deutsche marks: 
  (DM) per US$ - 1.7431 (January 1994), 1.6533 (1993), 1.5617 (1992),
  1.6595 (1991), 1.6157 (1990), 1.8800 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@United States, Communications

Railroads: 
  240,000 km of mainline routes, all standard 1.435 meter track, no
  government ownership (1989)
Highways: 
total: 
  6,243,163 km 
paved: 
  3,633,520 km (including 84,865 km of expressways)
unpaved: 
  2,609,643 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  41,009 km of navigable inland channels, exclusive of the Great Lakes
  (est.)
Pipelines: 
  petroleum 276,000 km; natural gas 331,000 km (1991)
Ports: 
  Anchorage, Baltimore, Beaumont, Boston, Charleston, Chicago,
  Cleveland, Duluth, Freeport, Galveston, Hampton Roads, Honolulu,
  Houston, Jacksonville, Long Beach, Los Angeles, Milwaukee, Mobile, New
  Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, Portland (Oregon), Richmond
  (California), San Francisco, Savannah, Seattle, Tampa, Wilmington
Merchant marine: 
  385 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 12,567,000 GRT/19,511,000 DWT,
  bulk 23, cargo 36, intermodal 128, liquefied gas 13, passenger-cargo
  3, tanker 169, tanker tug-barge 13 
note: 
  in addition, there are 219 government-owned vessels
Airports: 
total: 
  14,177 
usable: 
  12,417 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  4,820 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  63 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  325 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2,524 
Telecommunications: 
  126,000,000 telephone access lines; 7,557,000 cellular phone
  subscribers; broadcast stations - 4,987 AM, 4,932 FM, 1,092 TV; about
  9,000 TV cable systems; 530,000,000 radio sets and 193,000,000 TV sets
  in use; 16 satellites and 24 ocean cable systems in use; satellite
  ground stations - 45 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 16 Pacific Ocean
  INTELSAT (1990)

@United States, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Department of the Army, Department of the Navy (including Marine
  Corps), Department of the Air Force 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $315.5 billion, 5.3% of GDP (1992)


@Uruguay, Geography

Location: 
  Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean between
  Argentina and Brazil
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  176,220 sq km 
land area: 
  173,620 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Washington State
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,564 km, Argentina 579 km, Brazil 985 km 
Coastline: 
  660 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
territorial sea: 
  200 nm; overflight and navigation permitted beyond 12 nm
International disputes: 
  short section of boundary with Argentina is in dispute; two short
  sections of the boundary with Brazil are in dispute - Arroyo de la
  Invernada (Arroio Invernada) area of the Rio Quarai and the islands at
  the confluence of the Rio Cuareim (Rio Quarai) and the Uruguay River
Climate: 
  warm temperate; freezing temperatures almost unknown
Terrain: 
  mostly rolling plains and low hills; fertile coastal lowland
Natural resources: 
  soil, hydropower potential, minor minerals 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  8% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  78% 
forest and woodland: 
  4% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  1,100 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to seasonally high winds, droughts, floods
international agreements: 
  party to - Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

@Uruguay, People

Population: 
  3,198,910 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  0.75% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  17.7 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.39 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  17.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  74.09 years 
male: 
  70.88 years 
female: 
  77.47 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.44 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Uruguayan(s) 
adjective: 
  Uruguayan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  white 88%, mestizo 8%, black 4% 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 66% (less than half adult population attends church
  regularly), Protestant 2%, Jewish 2%, nonprofessing or other 30% 
Languages: 
  Spanish, Brazilero (Portuguese-Spanish mix on the Brazilian frontier)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  96% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  96% 
Labor force: 
  1.355 million (1991 est.)
by occupation: 
  government 25%, manufacturing 19%, agriculture 11%, commerce 12%,
  utilities, construction, transport, and communications 12%, other
  services 21% (1988 est.)

@Uruguay, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Oriental Republic of Uruguay 
conventional short form: 
  Uruguay 
local long form: 
  Republica Oriental del Uruguay 
local short form: 
  Uruguay 
Digraph: 
  UY
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Montevideo 
Administrative divisions: 
  19 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento); Artigas,
  Canelones, Cerro Largo, Colonia, Durazno, Flores, Florida, Lavalleja,
  Maldonado, Montevideo, Paysandu, Rio Negro, Rivera, Rocha, Salto, San
  Jose, Soriano, Tacuarembo, Treinta y Tres
Independence: 
  25 August 1828 (from Brazil)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 25 August (1828) 
Constitution: 
  27 November 1966, effective February 1967, suspended 27 June 1973, new
  constitution rejected by referendum 30 November 1980
Legal system: 
  based on Spanish civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Luis Alberto LACALLE (since 1 March 1990); Vice President
  Gonzalo AGUIRRE Ramirez (since 1 March 1990); election last held 26
  November 1989 (next to be held NA November 1994); results - Luis
  Alberto LACALLE Herrera (Blanco) 37%, Jorge BATLLE Ibanez (Colorado)
  29%, Liber SEREGNI Mosquera (Broad Front) 20%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral General Assembly (Asamblea General)
Chamber of Senators (Camara de Senadores): 
  elections last held 26 November 1989 (next to be held NA November
  1994); results - Blanco 40%, Colorado 30%, Broad Front 23% New Space
  7%; seats - (30 total) Blanco 12, Colorado 9, Broad Front 7, New Space
  2
Chamber of Representatives (Camera de Representantes): 
  elections last held NA November 1989 (next to be held NA November
  1994); results - Blanco 39%, Colorado 30%, Broad Front 22%, New Space
  8%, other 1%; seats - (99 total) number of seats by party NA
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  National (Blanco) Party; Colorado Party, Jorge BATLLE; Broad Front
  Coalition, Gen. Liber SEREGNI Mosquera; New Space Coalition, Hugo
  BATALLA
Member of: 
  AG (observer), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, LORCS, MERCOSUR, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL,
  PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMOGIP, UNOMOZ, UNTAC,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Eduardo MACGILLYCUDDY 
chancery: 
  1918 F Street NW, Washington, DC 20006 
telephone: 
  telephone (202) 331-1313 through 1316 
consulate(s) general: 
  Los Angeles, Miami, and New York 
consulate(s): 
  New Orleans 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Thomas DODD 
embassy: 
  Lauro Muller 1776, Montevideo 
mailing address: 
  APO AA 34035 
telephone: 
  [598] (2) 23-60-61 or 48-77-77 
FAX: 
  [598] (2) 48-86-11 
Flag: 
  nine equal horizontal stripes of white (top and bottom) alternating
  with blue; there is a white square in the upper hoist-side corner with
  a yellow sun bearing a human face known as the Sun of May and 16 rays
  alternately triangular and wavy

@Uruguay, Economy

Overview: 
  Uruguay is a small economy with favorable climate, good soils, and
  solid hydropower potential. Economic development has been held back by
  excessive government regulation of economic detail and 50% to 130%
  inflation. After several years of sluggish growth, real GDP jumped by
  about 7.5% in 1992. The rise is attributable mainly to an increase in
  Argentine demand for Uruguayan exports, particularly agricultural
  products and electricity. In a major step toward greater regional
  economic cooperation, Uruguay in 1991 had joined Brazil, Argentina,
  and Paraguay in forming the Southern Cone Common Market (Mercosur). A
  referendum in December 1992 overturned key portions of landmark
  privatization legislation, dealing a serious blow to President
  LACALLE's broad economic reform plan. Hampered by a slowdown in the
  agricultural sector, the economy grew at only 2% in 1993 compared with
  7.5% in 1992. Although inflation declined for the second consecutive
  year, a surge in the money supply, rising food prices, a record trade
  deficit, and an increase in the government deficit toward the end of
  the year foreshadowed troubles ahead in 1994.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $19 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $6,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  50% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  8.8% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $3 billion, including capital expenditures of $388 million (1991 est.)
Exports: 
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  wool and textile manufactures, beef and other animal products,
  leather, rice
partners: 
  Brazil, Argentina, US, China, Italy
Imports: 
  $2 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and equipment, vehicles, chemicals, minerals, plastics
partners: 
  Brazil, Argentina, US, Nigeria
External debt: 
  $4.2 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 4.2% (1992 est.), accounts for almost 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,168,000 kW
production: 
  5.96 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,900 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  meat processing, wool and hides, sugar, textiles, footwear, leather
  apparel, tires, cement, fishing, petroleum refining, wine
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 12% of GDP; large areas devoted to livestock grazing;
  wheat, rice, corn, sorghum; self-sufficient in most basic foodstuffs
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-88), $105 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $420
  million; Communist countries (1970-89), $69 million 
Currency: 
  1 Uruguayan peso ($Ur) = 100 centesimos
Exchange rates: 
  Uruguayan pesos ($Ur) per US$1 - 4.4710 (January 1994), 3.9484 (1993);
  new Uruguayan pesos (N$Ur) per US$1 - 3,457.5 (December 1992), 3,026.9
  (1992), 2,489 (1991), 1,594 (1990), 805 (1989)
note: 
  on 1 March 1993 the former New Peso (N$Ur) was replaced as Uruguay's
  unit of currency by the Peso which is equal to 1,000 of the New Pesos;
  consequently there is a major change in the peso/dollar exchange rate
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Uruguay, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,000 km, all 1.435-meter (standard) gauge and government owned
Highways: 
total: 
  49,900 km 
paved: 
  6,700 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 3,000 km; earth 40,200 km 
Inland waterways: 
  1,600 km; used by coastal and shallow-draft river craft
Ports: 
  Montevideo, Punta del Este, Colonia
Merchant marine: 
  4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 84,797 GRT/132,296 DWT, cargo 1,
  container 2, oil tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  87 
usable: 
  80 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  16 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  14 
Telecommunications: 
  most modern facilities concentrated in Montevideo; new nationwide
  microwave network; 337,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 99 AM, no
  FM, 26 TV, 9 shortwave; 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth stations

@Uruguay, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy (including Naval Air Arm, Coast Guard, Marines), Air Force,
  Grenadier Guards, Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 765,490; fit for military service 621,629 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $216 million, 2.3% of GDP (1991 est.)


@Uzbekistan, Geography

Location: 
  Central Asia, bordering the Aral Sea, between Kazakhstan and
  Turkmenistan
Map references: 
  Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States - Central Asian States,
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  447,400 sq km 
land area: 
  425,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than California
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,221 km, Afghanistan 137 km, Kazakhstan 2,203 km, Kyrgyzstan
  1,099 km, Tajikistan 1,161 km, Turkmenistan 1,621 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km 
note: 
  Uzbekistan borders the Aral Sea (420 km)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  Russia may dispute current de facto maritime border to midpoint of
  Caspian Sea from shore
Climate: 
  mostly midlatitude desert, long, hot summers, mild winters; semiarid
  grassland in east
Terrain: 
  mostly flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes; broad, flat intensely
  irrigated river valleys along course of Amu Darya and Sirdaryo Rivers;
  Fergana Valley in east surrounded by mountainous Tajikistan and
  Kyrgyzstan; shrinking Aral Sea in west
Natural resources: 
  natural gas, petroleum, coal, gold, uranium, silver, copper, lead and
  zinc, tungsten, molybdenum 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  47% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  42% 
Irrigated land: 
  41,550 sq km (1990)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  drying up of the Aral Sea is resulting in growing concentrations of
  chemical pesticides and natural salts; these substances are then blown
  from the increasingly exposed lake bed and contribute to
  desertification; water pollution from industrial wastes is the cause
  of many human health disorders; increasing soil salinization; soil
  contamination from agricultural chemicals, including DDT
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer
  Protection
Note: 
  landlocked

@Uzbekistan, People

Population: 
  22,608,866 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.13% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  30.01 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.51 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.22 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  53.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  68.58 years 
male: 
  65.28 years 
female: 
  72.04 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.73 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Uzbek(s) 
adjective: 
  Uzbek 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Uzbek 71.4%, Russian 8.3%, Tajik 4.7%, Kazakh 4.1%, Tatar 2.4%,
  Karakalpak 2.1%, other 7% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 88% (mostly Sunnis), Eastern Orthodox 9%, other 3% 
Languages: 
  Uzbek 74.3%, Russian 14.2%, Tajik 4.4%, other 7.1% 
Literacy: 
  age 9-49 can read and write (1970)
total population: 
  100% 
male: 
  100% 
female: 
  100% 
Labor force: 
  8.234 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and forestry 43%, industry and construction 22%, other 35%
  (1992)

@Uzbekistan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Uzbekistan 
conventional short form: 
  Uzbekistan 
local long form: 
  Uzbekiston Respublikasi 
local short form: 
  none 
former: 
  Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic 
Digraph: 
  UZ
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Tashkent (Toshkent) 
Administrative divisions: 
  12 wiloyatlar (singular - wiloyat), 1 autonomous republic*
  (respublikasi, singular - respublika), and 1 city** (shahri); Andijon
  Wiloyati, Bukhoro Wiloyati, Jizzakh Wiloyati, Farghona Wiloyati,
  Karakalpakstan* (Nukus), Qashqadaryo Wiloyati (Qarshi), Khorazm
  Wiloyati (Urganch), Namangan Wiloyati, Nawoiy Wiloyati, Samarqand
  Wiloyati, Sirdaryo Wiloyati (Guliston), Surkhondaryo Wiloyati
  (Termiz), Toshkent Shahri**, Toshkent Wiloyati
note: 
  an administrative division has the same name as its administrative
  center (exceptions have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses)
Independence: 
  31 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 1 September (1991) 
Constitution: 
  new constitution adopted 8 December 1992
Legal system: 
  evolution of Soviet civil law; still lacks independent judicial system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Islam KARIMOV (since NA March 1990); election last held 29
  December 1991 (next to be held NA December 1996); results - Islam
  KARIMOV 86%, Mukhammad SOLIKH 12%, other 2%
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Abdulkhashim MUTALOV (since 13 January 1992), First
  Deputy Prime Minister Ismail Hakimovitch DJURABEKOV (since NA) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet of Ministers; appointed by the president with approval of the
  Supreme Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Supreme Soviet: 
  elections last held 18 February 1990 (next to be held winter 1994);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (500 total) Communist
  450, ERK 10, other 40; note - total number of seats will be reduced to
  250 in next election
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  People's Democratic Party (PDP; formerly Communist Party), Islam A.
  KARIMOV, chairman; Erk (Freedom) Democratic Party (EDP), Muhammad
  SOLIKH, chairman (in exile); note - ERK was banned 9 December 1992
Other political or pressure groups: 
  Birlik (Unity) People's Movement (BPM), Abdul Rakhim PULATOV, chairman
  (in exile); Islamic Rebirth Party (IRP), Abdullah UTAYEV, chairman
note: 
  PULATOV (BPM) and SOLIKH (EDP) are both in exile in the West; UTAYEV
  (IRP) is either in prison or in exile
Member of: 
  CCC, CIS, CSCE, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IOC, ITU, NACC, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Fatikh TESHABAYEV 
chancery: 
  Suites 619 and 623, 1511 K Street NW, Washington DC, 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 638-4266/4267 
FAX: 
  (202) 638-4268 
consulate(s) general: 
  New York 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Henry L. CLARKE 
embassy: 
  82 Chelanzanskaya, Tashkent 
mailing address: 
  use embassy street address 
telephone: 
  [7] (3712) 77-14-07, 77-11-32 
FAX: 
  [7] (3712) 77-69-53 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and green separated
  by red fimbriations with a crescent moon and 12 stars in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant

@Uzbekistan, Economy

Overview: 
  Uzbekistan is a dry, landlocked country of which 20% is intensely
  cultivated, irrigated river valleys. It is one of the poorest states
  of the former USSR with 60% of its population living in overpopulated
  rural communities. Nevertheless, Uzbekistan is the world's third
  largest cotton exporter, a major producer of gold and natural gas, and
  a regionally significant producer of chemicals and machinery. Since
  independence, the government has sought to prop up the Soviet-style
  command economy with subsidies and tight controls on prices and
  production. Such policies have buffered the economy from the sharp
  declines in output and high inflation experienced by many other former
  Soviet republics. By late 1993, however, they had become increasingly
  unsustainable as inflation soared and Russia forced the Uzbek
  Government to introduce its own currency. Faced with mounting economic
  problems, the government has increased its cooperation with
  international financial institutions, announced an acceleration of
  privatization, and stepped up efforts to attract foreign investors.
  Nevertheless, the regime is likely to resist full-fledged market
  reforms.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $53.7 billion (1993 estimate from
  the UN International Comparison Program, as extended to 1991 and
  published in the World Bank's World Development Report 1993; and as
  extrapolated to 1993 using official Uzbek statistics, which are very
  uncertain because of major economic changes since 1990)
National product real growth rate: 
  -3.5% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,430 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  18% per month (1993)
Unemployment rate: 
  0.2% includes only officially registered unemployed; large numbers of
  underemployed workers
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $706.5 million to outside the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  cotton, gold, natural gas, mineral fertilizers, ferrous metals,
  textiles, food products
partners: 
  Russia, Ukraine, Eastern Europe, US
Imports: 
  $947.3 million from outside the FSU countries (1993)
commodities: 
  grain, machinery and parts, consumer durables, other foods
partners: 
  principally other FSU countries, Czech Republic
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -7% (1993)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  11,950,000 kW
production: 
  50.9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,300 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  textiles, food processing, machine building, metallurgy, natural gas
Agriculture: 
  livestock, cotton, vegetables, fruits, grain
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy; mostly for CIS
  consumption; limited government eradication programs; used as
  transshipment points for illicit drugs to Western Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $125 million by yearend 1993; future commitments for about $500
  million
Currency: 
  introduced provisional som-coupons 10 November 1993 which circulated
  parallel to the Russian rubles; became the sole legal currency 31
  January 1994; will be replaced in July 1994 by the som currency
Exchange rates: 
  NA
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Uzbekistan, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,460 km; does not include industrial lines (1990)
Highways: 
total: 
  78,400 km 
paved and gravel: 
  67,000 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 11,400 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural gas 810 km (1992)
Ports: 
  none; landlocked
Airports: 
total: 
  265 
usable: 
  74 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  30 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  20 
with runways 1,060-2,439 m: 
  19 
note: 
  a C-130 can land on a 1,060-m airstrip
Telecommunications: 
  poorly developed; 1,458,000 telephone circuits with 68.75 circuits per
  1,000 persons (1991); linked by landline or microwave with CIS member
  states and by leased connection via the Moscow international gateway
  switch to other countries; new INTELSAT links to Tokyo and Ankara give
  Uzbekistan international access independent of Russian facilities;
  satellite earth stations - Orbita and INTELSAT; NMT-450 analog
  cellular network established in Tashkent

@Uzbekistan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, National Guard, Republic Security Forces (internal and border
  troops)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 5,388,456; fit for military service 4,403,497; reach
  military age (18) annually 222,405 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Vanuatu, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Melanesia, 5,750 km southwest of Honolulu in the South
  Pacific Ocean, about three-quarters of the way between Hawaii and
  Australia
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  14,760 sq km 
land area: 
  14,760 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Connecticut
note: 
  includes more than 80 islands
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  2,528 km 
Maritime claims: 
  measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by southeast trade winds
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains of volcanic origin; narrow coastal plains
Natural resources: 
  manganese, hardwood forests, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  1% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  2% 
forest and woodland: 
  1% 
other: 
  91% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to tropical cyclones or typhoons (January to April); volcanism
  causes minor earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Marine Dumping, Ship
  Pollution; signed, but not ratified - Law of the Sea

@Vanuatu, People

Population: 
  169,776 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.29% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.21 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9.31 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  68.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  59.25 years 
male: 
  57.51 years 
female: 
  61.09 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.31 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Ni-Vanuatu (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Ni-Vanuatu 
Ethnic divisions: 
  indigenous Melanesian 94%, French 4%, Vietnamese, Chinese, Pacific
  Islanders 
Religions: 
  Presbyterian 36.7%, Anglican 15%, Catholic 15%, indigenous beliefs
  7.6%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6.2%, Church of Christ 3.8%, other 15.7% 
Languages: 
  English (official), French (official), pidgin (known as Bislama or
  Bichelama) 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1979)
total population: 
  53% 
male: 
  57% 
female: 
  48% 
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  NA

@Vanuatu, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Vanuatu 
conventional short form: 
  Vanuatu 
former: 
  New Hebrides 
Digraph: 
  NH
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Port-Vila 
Administrative divisions: 
  11 island councils; Ambrym, Aoba/Maewo, Banks/Torres, Efate, Epi,
  Malakula, Paama, Pentecote, Santo/Malo, Shepherd, Tafea
Independence: 
  30 July 1980 (from France and UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 30 July (1980) 
Constitution: 
  30 July 1980
Legal system: 
  unified system being created from former dual French and British
  systems
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Jean Marie LEYE (since 2 March 1994) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Maxime CARLOT Korman (since 16 December 1991); Deputy
  Prime Minister Sethy REGENVANU (since 17 December 1991) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister, responsible to
  parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held 2 December 1991 (next to be held by November
  1995); note - after election, a coalition was formed by the Union of
  Moderate Parties and the National United Party to form a new
  government on 16 December 1991, but political party associations are
  fluid; seats - (46 total) UMP 19; NUP 10; VP 10; MPP 4; TUP 1;
  Nagriamel 1; Friend 1
note: 
  the National Council of Chiefs advises on matters of custom and land
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Vanuatu Party (VP), Donald KALPOKAS; Union of Moderate Parties (UMP),
  Serge VOHOR; Melanesian Progressive Party (MPP), Barak SOPE; National
  United Party (NUP), Walter LINI; Tan Union Party (TUP), Vincent
  BOULEKONE; Nagriamel Party, Jimmy STEVENS; Friend Melanesian Party,
  leader NA
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, IMO,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NAM, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  Vanuatu does not have a mission in the US
US diplomatic representation: 
  the ambassador to Papua New Guinea is accredited to Vanuatu
Flag: 
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green with a black
  isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) all separated by a
  black-edged yellow stripe in the shape of a horizontal Y (the two
  points of the Y face the hoist side and enclose the triangle);
  centered in the triangle is a boar's tusk encircling two crossed
  namele leaves, all in yellow

@Vanuatu, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is based primarily on subsistence farming which provides a
  living for about 80% of the population. Fishing and tourism are the
  other mainstays of the economy. Mineral deposits are negligible; the
  country has no known petroleum deposits. A small light industry sector
  caters to the local market. Tax revenues come mainly from import
  duties.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $142 million (1988 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  6% (1991)
National product per capita: 
  $1,050 (1990)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  2.3% (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $90 million 
expenditures: 
  $103 million, including capital expenditures of $45 million (1989
  est.)
Exports: 
  $14.9 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  copra, beef, cocoa, timber, coffee
partners: 
  Netherlands, Japan, France, New Caledonia, Belgium
Imports: 
  $74 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  machines and vehicles, food and beverages, basic manufactures, raw
  materials and fuels, chemicals
partners: 
  Australia 36%, Japan 13%, NZ 10%, France 8%, Fiji 8%
External debt: 
  $38 million (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 8.1% (1990); accounts for about 10% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  17,000 kW
production: 
  30 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  180 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  food and fish freezing, wood processing, meat canning
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 40% of GDP; export crops - coconuts, cocoa, coffee, fish;
  subsistence crops - taro, yams, coconuts, fruits, vegetables
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $606 million 
Currency: 
  1 vatu (VT) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  vatu (VT) per US$1 - 123.48 (September 1993), 113.39 (1992), 111.68
  (1991), 116.57 (1990), 116.04 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Vanuatu, Communications

Railroads: 
  none
Highways: 
total: 
  1,027 km 
paved: 
  240 km 
unpaved: 
  787 km 
Ports: 
  Port-Vila, Luganville, Palikoulo
Merchant marine: 
  131 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,992,201 GRT/2,909,381 DWT,
  bulk 57, cargo 23, chemical tanker 2, combination bulk 1, container 5,
  liquefied gas 3, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 8, passenger 1,
  refrigerated cargo 19, vehicle carrier 11 
note: 
  a flag of convenience registry
Airports: 
total: 
  31 
usable: 
  31 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
Telecommunications: 
  broadcast stations - 2 AM, no FM, no TV; 3,000 telephones; 1 Pacific
  Ocean INTELSAT ground station

@Vanuatu, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Vanuatu Police Force (VPF), paramilitary Vanuatu Mobile Force (VMF)
note: 
  no military forces
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Venezuela, Geography

Location: 
  Northern South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea between Colombia
  and Guyana
Map references: 
  South America, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  912,050 sq km 
land area: 
  882,050 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than twice the size of California
Land boundaries: 
  total 4,993 km, Brazil 2,200 km, Colombia 2,050 km, Guyana 743 km 
Coastline: 
  2,800 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  15 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claims all of Guyana west of the Essequibo River; maritime boundary
  dispute with Colombia in the Gulf of Venezuela
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands
Terrain: 
  Andes Mountains and Maracaibo Lowlands in northwest; central plains
  (llanos); Guiana Highlands in southeast
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold, bauxite, other minerals,
  hydropower, diamonds 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  20% 
forest and woodland: 
  39% 
other: 
  37% 
Irrigated land: 
  2,640 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  sewage pollution of Lago de Valencia; oil and urban pollution of Lago
  de Maracaibo; deforestation; soil degradation; urban and industrial
  pollution, especially along the Caribbean coast
natural hazards: 
  subject to floods, rockslides, mudslides; periodic droughts
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified -
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping
Note: 
  on major sea and air routes linking North and South America

@Venezuela, People

Population: 
  20,562,405 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.16% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.74 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.63 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.47 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  27.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73 years 
male: 
  70.12 years 
female: 
  76.03 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.05 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Venezuelan(s) 
adjective: 
  Venezuelan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  mestizo 67%, white 21%, black 10%, Indian 2% 
Religions: 
  nominally Roman Catholic 96%, Protestant 2% 
Languages: 
  Spanish (official), Indian dialects spoken by about 200,000
  Amerindians in the remote interior
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  88% 
male: 
  87% 
female: 
  90% 
Labor force: 
  5.8 million 
by occupation: 
  services 56%, industry 28%, agriculture 16% (1985)

@Venezuela, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Venezuela 
conventional short form: 
  Venezuela 
local long form: 
  Republica de Venezuela 
local short form: 
  Venezuela 
Digraph: 
  VE
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Caracas 
Administrative divisions: 
  21 states (estados, singular - estado), 1 territory* (territorio), 1
  federal district** (distrito federal), and 1 federal dependence***
  (dependencia federal); Amazonas*, Anzoategui, Apure, Aragua, Barinas,
  Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Delta Amacuro, Dependencias Federales***,
  Distrito Federal**, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas,
  Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zulia
note: 
  the federal dependence consists of 11 federally controlled island
  groups with a total of 72 individual islands
Independence: 
  5 July 1811 (from Spain)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 5 July (1811) 
Constitution: 
  23 January 1961
Legal system: 
  based on Napoleonic code; judicial review of legislative acts in
  Cassation Court only; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Rafael CALDERA Rodriquez (since 2 February 1994); election
  last held 5 December 1993 (next to be held December 1998); results -
  Rafael CALDERA (National Convergence) 30.45%, Claudio FERMIN (AD)
  23.59%, Oswaldo ALVAREZ PAZ (COPEI) 22.72%, Andres VELASQUEZ (Causa R)
  21.94%, other 1.3%
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  bicameral Congress of the Republic (Congreso de la Republica)
Senate (Senado): 
  elections last held 5 December 1993 (next to be held December 1998);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (52 total) AD 18, COPEI
  15, Causa R 9, MAS 5, National Convergence 5; note - 3 former
  presidents (2 from AD, 1 from COPEI) hold lifetime senate seats
Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados): 
  elections last held 5 December 1993 (next to be held December 1998);
  results - AD 27.9%, COPEI 26.9%, MAS 12.4%, National Convergence
  12.9%, Causa R 19.9%; seats - (201 total) AD 55, COPEI 53, MAS 24,
  National Convergence 26, Causa R 40, other 3
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de Justicia) Gonzalo RODRIGUEZ
  Corro, President
Political parties and leaders: 
  National Convergence (Convergencia), Jose Miguel UZCATEGUI, director;
  Social Christian Party (COPEI), Hilarion CARDOZO, president, and Jose
  CURIEL, secretary general; Democratic Action (AD), Pedro PARIS
  Montesinos, president, and Luis ALFARO Ucero, secretary general;
  Movement Toward Socialism (MAS), Argelia LAYA, president, and Freddy
  MUNOZ, secretary general; Radical Cause (La Causa R), Pablo MEDINA,
  secretary general
Other political or pressure groups: 
  FEDECAMARAS, a conservative business group; Venezuelan Confederation
  of Workers (CTV, labor organization dominated by the Democratic
  Action); VECINOS groups
Member of: 
  AG, BCIE, CARICOM (observer), CDB, CG, ECLAC, FAO, G-3, G-11, G-15,
  G-19, G-24, G-77, GATT, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IFAD, IFC,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
  LORCS, MINURSO, NAM, OAS, ONUSAL, OPANAL, OPEC, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNPROFOR, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Pedro Luis ECHEVERRIA 
chancery: 
  1099 30th Street NW, Washington, DC 20007 
telephone: 
  (202) 342-2214 
consulate(s) general: 
  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia,
  San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico) 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Jeffrey DAVIDOW 
embassy: 
  Avenida Francisco de Miranda and Avenida Principal de la Floresta,
  Caracas 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 62291, Caracas 1060-A, or APO AA 34037 
telephone: 
  [58] (2) 285-2222 
FAX: 
  [58] (2) 285-0336 
consulate(s): 
  Maracaibo (closed March 1994) 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top), blue, and red with the
  coat of arms on the hoist side of the yellow band and an arc of seven
  white five-pointed stars centered in the blue band

@Venezuela, Economy

Overview: 
  Petroleum is the backbone of the economy, accounting for 23% of GDP,
  61% of central government ordinary revenues, and 77% of export
  earnings in 1993. Former President PEREZ introduced an economic
  readjustment program when he assumed office in February 1989. Lower
  tariffs and the removal of price controls, a free market exchange
  rate, and market-linked interest rates threw the economy into
  confusion, causing an 8% decline in GDP in 1989. The economy recovered
  part way in 1990 and grew by 9.7% in 1991 and 6.8% in 1992; economic
  activity fell by 1% in 1993, primarily because of business concerns
  over political instability.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $161 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $8,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  46% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  8.2% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $9.8 billion 
expenditures: 
  $11.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $103 million (1993
  est.)
Exports: 
  $14.2 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum 77%, bauxite and aluminum, steel, chemicals, agricultural
  products, basic manufactures
partners: 
  US and Puerto Rico 42%, Japan, Netherlands, Italy
Imports: 
  $11 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  raw materials, machinery and equipment, transport equipment,
  construction materials
partners: 
  US 50%, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Canada
External debt: 
  $28.5 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 6.1% (1992 est.); accounts for 40% of GDP, including
  petroleum
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  21,130,000 kW
production: 
  58.541 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,830 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, iron-ore mining, construction materials, food processing,
  textiles, steel, aluminum, motor vehicle assembly
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 6% of GDP and 16% of labor force; products - corn,
  sorghum, sugarcane, rice, bananas, vegetables, coffee, beef, pork,
  milk, eggs, fish; not self-sufficient in food other than meat
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis and coca leaf for the international drug
  trade on a small scale; however, large quantities of cocaine transit
  the country from Colombia; important money-laundering hub
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-86), $488 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $10 million 
Currency: 
  1 bolivar (Bs) = 100 centimos
Exchange rates: 
  bolivares (Bs) per US$1 - 107.260 (January 1994), 90.826 (1993), 68.38
  (1992), 56.82 (1991), 46.90 (1990), 34.68 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Venezuela, Communications

Railroads: 
  542 km total; 363 km 1.435-meter standard gauge all single track,
  government owned; 179 km 1.435-meter gauge, privately owned
Highways: 
total: 
  81,000 km 
paved: 
  31,200 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 24,800 km; earth and unimproved earth 25,000 km 
Inland waterways: 
  7,100 km; Rio Orinoco and Lago de Maracaibo accept oceangoing vessels
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 6,370 km; petroleum products 480 km; natural gas 4,010 km 
Ports: 
  Amuay Bay, Bajo Grande, El Tablazo, La Guaira, Puerto Cabello, Puerto
  Ordaz
Merchant marine: 
  47 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 741,688 GRT/1,204,233 DWT, bulk
  4, cargo 16, combination bulk 1, container 1, liquefied gas 2, oil
  tanker 17, passenger cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4, short-sea
  passenger 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  425 
usable: 
  392 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  139 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  15 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  92 
Telecommunications: 
  modern and expanding; 1,440,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 181
  AM, no FM, 59 TV, 26 shortwave; 3 submarine coaxial cables; satellite
  ground stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT and 3 domestic

@Venezuela, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Nacionales, FAN) includes -
  Ground Forces or Army (Fuerzas Terrestres or Ejercito), Naval Forces
  (Fuerzas Navales or Armada), Air Forces (Fuerzas Aereas or Aviacion),
  Armed Forces of Cooperation or National Guard (Fuerzas Armadas de
  Cooperation or Guardia Nacional)
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 5,341,855; fit for military service 3,875,523; reach
  military age (18) annually 224,550 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.95 billion, 4% of GDP (1991)


@Vietnam, Geography

Location: 
  Southeastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea, between Laos and the
  Philippines
Map references: 
  Asia, Southeast Asia, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  329,560 sq km 
land area: 
  325,360 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than New Mexico
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,818 km, Cambodia 982 km, China 1,281 km, Laos 1,555 km 
Coastline: 
  3,444 km (excludes islands)
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200 nm or the edge of continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  maritime boundary with Cambodia not defined; involved in a complex
  dispute over the Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, Philippines,
  Taiwan, and possibly Brunei; unresolved maritime boundary with
  Thailand; maritime boundary dispute with China in the Gulf of Tonkin;
  Paracel Islands occupied by China but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan
Climate: 
  tropical in south; monsoonal in north with hot, rainy season (mid-May
  to mid-September) and warm, dry season (mid-October to mid-March)
Terrain: 
  low, flat delta in south and north; central highlands; hilly,
  mountainous in far north and northwest
Natural resources: 
  phosphates, coal, manganese, bauxite, chromate, offshore oil deposits,
  forests 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  22% 
permanent crops: 
  2% 
meadows and pastures: 
  1% 
forest and woodland: 
  40% 
other: 
  35% 
Irrigated land: 
  18,300 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil degradation; water pollution and overfishing
  threatening marine life populations
natural hazards: 
  occasional typhoons (May to January) with extensive flooding
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

@Vietnam, People

Population: 
  73,103,898 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.78% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  27.13 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  7.76 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -1.53 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  45.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  65.41 years 
male: 
  63.37 years 
female: 
  67.58 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.33 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Vietnamese (singular and plural) 
adjective: 
  Vietnamese 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Vietnamese 85-90%, Chinese 3%, Muong, Thai, Meo, Khmer, Man, Cham 
Religions: 
  Buddhist, Taoist, Roman Catholic, indigenous beliefs, Islamic,
  Protestant 
Languages: 
  Vietnamese (official), French, Chinese, English, Khmer, tribal
  languages (Mon-Khmer and Malayo-Polynesian)
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990)
total population: 
  88% 
male: 
  93% 
female: 
  83% 
Labor force: 
  32.7 million 
by occupation: 
  agricultural 65%, industrial and service 35% (1990 est.)

@Vietnam, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Socialist Republic of Vietnam 
conventional short form: 
  Vietnam 
local long form: 
  Cong Hoa Chu Nghia Viet Nam 
local short form: 
  Viet Nam 
Abbreviation: 
  SRV 
Digraph: 
  VM
Type: 
  Communist state 
Capital: 
  Hanoi 
Administrative divisions: 
  50 provinces (tinh, singular and plural), 3 municipalities* (thanh
  pho, singular and plural); An Giang, Ba Ria-Vung Tau, Bac Thai, Ben
  Tre, Binh Dinh, Binh Thuan, Can Tho, Cao Bang, Dac Lac, Dong Nai, Dong
  Thap, Gia Lai, Ha Bac, Ha Giang, Ha Noi*, Ha Tay, Ha Tinh, Hai Hung,
  Hai Phong*, Ho Chi Minh*, Hoa Binh, Khanh Hoa, Kien Giang, Kon Tum,
  Lai Chau, Lam Dong, Lang Son, Lao Cai, Long An, Minh Hai, Nam Ha, Nghe
  An, Ninh Binh, Ninh Thuan, Phu Yen, Quang Binh, Quang Nam-Da Nang,
  Quang Ngai, Quang Ninh, Quang Tri, Soc Trang, Son La, Song Be, Tay
  Ninh, Thai Binh, Thanh Hoa, Thua Thien, Tien Giang, Tra Vinh, Tuyen
  Quang, Vinh Long, Vinh Phu, Yen Bai
Independence: 
  2 September 1945 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 2 September (1945) 
Constitution: 
  15 April 1992
Legal system: 
  based on Communist legal theory and French civil law system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Le Duc ANH (since 23 September 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Vo Van KIET (since 9 August 1991); First Deputy Prime
  Minister Phan Van KHAI (since 10 August 1991); Deputy Prime Minister
  Nguyen KHANH (since NA February 1987); Deputy Prime Minister Tran Duc
  LUONG (since NA February 1987) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet;  appointed by the president on proposal of the prime minister
  and ratification of the Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly (Quoc-Hoi): 
  elections last held 19 July 1992 (next to be held NA July 1997);
  results - VCP is the only party; seats - (395 total) VCP or
  VCP-approved 395
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme People's Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  only party - Vietnam Communist Party (VCP), DO MUOI, general secretary
Member of: 
  ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN (observer), ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none; Ambassador Le Van BANG is the Permanent Representative to the UN
US diplomatic representation: 
  none
Flag: 
  red with a large yellow five-pointed star in the center

@Vietnam, Economy

Overview: 
  Vietnam has made significant progress in recent years moving away from
  the planned economic model toward a more effective market-based
  economic system. Most prices are now fully decontrolled, and the
  Vietnamese currency has been effectively devalued and floated at world
  market rates. In addition, the scope for private sector activity has
  been expanded, primarily through decollectivization of the
  agricultural sector and introduction of laws giving legal recognition
  to private business. Nearly three-quarters of export earnings are
  generated by only two commodities, rice and crude oil. Led by industry
  and construction, the economy did well in 1993 with output rising
  perhaps 7%. However, the industrial sector remains burdened by
  uncompetitive state-owned enterprises the government is unwilling or
  unable to privatize. Unemployment looms as a serious problem with
  roughly 25% of the workforce without jobs and with population growth
  swelling the ranks of the unemployed yearly.
National product: 
  GNP - purchasing power equivalent - $72 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  7% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,000 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  5.2% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  25% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.9 billion 
expenditures: 
  $2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA (1992)
Exports: 
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum, rice, agricultural products, marine products, coffee
partners: 
  Japan, Hong Kong, Thailand, Germany, Indonesia
Imports: 
  $3.1 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum products, steel products, railroad equipment, chemicals,
  medicines, raw cotton, fertilizer, grain
partners: 
  Hong Kong, Japan, Indonesia, South Korea, Taiwan
External debt: 
  $3.4 billion Western countries; $4.5 billion CEMA debts primarily to
  Russia;  $700 million commercial debts (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 15% (1992); accounts for 20% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,300,000 kW
production: 
  9 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  130 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, textiles, machine building, mining, cement, chemical
  fertilizer, glass, tires, oil
Agriculture: 
  accounts for almost 40% of GDP; paddy rice, corn, potatoes make up 50%
  of farm output; commercial crops (rubber, soybeans, coffee, tea,
  bananas) and animal products 50%; since 1989 self-sufficient in food
  staple rice; fish catch of 943,100 metric tons (1989 est.)
Illicit drugs: 
  minor opium producer and secondary transit point for Southeast Asian
  heroin destined for the US and Europe
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $1.9 billion in credits and grants pledged by international donors for
  1994, Japan largest contributor with $550 million
Currency: 
  1 new dong (D) = 100 xu
Exchange rates: 
  new dong (D) per US$1 - 10,800 (November 1993), 8,100 (July 1991),
  7,280 (December 1990), 3,996 (March 1990); note - 1985-89 figures are
  end of year
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Vietnam, Communications

Railroads: 
  3,059 km total; 2,454 1.000-meter gauge, 151 km 1.435-meter (standard)
  gauge, 230 km dual gauge (three rails), and 224 km not restored to
  service after war damage
Highways: 
total: 
  85,000 km 
paved: 
  9,400 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 48,700 km; unimproved earth 26,900 km 
Inland waterways: 
  17,702 km navigable; more than 5,149 km navigable at all times by
  vessels up to 1.8 meter draft
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 150 km 
Ports: 
  Da Nang, Haiphong, Ho Chi Minh City
Merchant marine: 
  101 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 460,225 GRT/741,231 DWT, bulk
  3, cargo 86, oil tanker 8, refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  100 
usable: 
  100 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  50 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  20 
Telecommunications: 
  the inadequacies of the obsolete switching equipment and cable system
  is a serious constraint on the business sector and on economic growth,
  and restricts access to the international links that Vietnam has
  established with most major countries; the telephone system is not
  generally available for private use (25 telephones for each 10,000
  persons); 3 satellite earth stations; broadcast stations - NA AM, 288
  FM; 36 (77 repeaters) TV; about 2,500,000 TV receivers and 7,000,000
  radio receivers in use (1991)

@Vietnam, Defense Forces

Branches: 
People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) including: 
  Ground, Navy (including Naval Infantry), Air Force 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 18,281,483; fit for military service 11,602,318; reach
  military age (17) annually 762,943 (1994 est.)

Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GNP


@Virgin Islands

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Virgin Islands, Geography

Location: 
  Caribbean, in the eastern Caribbean Sea, about 110 km east and
  southeast of Puerto Rico
Map references: 
  Central America and the Caribbean 
Area: 
total area: 
  352 sq km 
land area: 
  349 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than twice the size of Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  188 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  subtropical, tempered by easterly tradewinds, relatively low humidity,
  little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season May to November
Terrain: 
  mostly hilly to rugged and mountainous with little level land
Natural resources: 
  sun, sand, sea, surf 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  15% 
permanent crops: 
  6% 
meadows and pastures: 
  26% 
forest and woodland: 
  6% 
other: 
  47% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  lack of natural freshwater resources
natural hazards: 
  rarely affected by hurricanes; subject to frequent severe droughts,
  floods, earthquakes
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  important location along the Anegada Passage - a key shipping lane for
  the Panama Canal; Saint Thomas has one of the best natural, deepwater
  harbors in the Caribbean

@Virgin Islands, People

Population: 
  97,564 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  -0.52% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  19.41 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -19.41 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  12.54 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  75.29 years 
male: 
  73.6 years 
female: 
  77.2 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.53 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Virgin Islander(s) 
adjective: 
  Virgin Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  West Indian (45% born in the Virgin Islands and 29% born elsewhere in
  the West Indies) 74%, US mainland 13%, Puerto Rican 5%, other 8%;
  black 80%, white 15%, other 5%; Hispanic origin 14%
Religions: 
  Baptist 42%, Roman Catholic 34%, Episcopalian 17%, other 7% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Spanish, Creole 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  45,500 (1988)
by occupation: 
  tourism 70%

@Virgin Islands, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Virgin Islands of the United States 
conventional short form: 
  Virgin Islands 
Digraph: 
  VQ
Type: 
  organized, unincorporated territory of the US administered by the
  Office of Territorial and International Affairs, US Department of the
  Interior
Capital: 
  Charlotte Amalie 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (territory of the US)
National holiday: 
  Transfer Day, 31 March (1917) (from Denmark to US) 
Constitution: 
  Revised Organic Act of 22 July 1954
Legal system: 
  based on US
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal; note - indigenous inhabitants are US
  citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20 January 1993); Vice
  President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January 1993) 
head of government: 
  Governor Alexander A. FARRELLY (since 5 January 1987); Lieutenant
  Governor Derek M. HODGE (since 5 January 1987); election last held 6
  November 1990 (next to be held November 1994); results - Governor
  Alexander FARRELLY (Democratic Party) 56.5% defeated Juan LUIS
  (independent) 38.5%
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Senate: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held 2 November 1994);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (15 total) number of
  seats by party NA
US House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 3 November 1992 (next to be held 2 November 1994);
  results - Ron DE LUGO reelected as delegate; seats - (1 total); seat
  by party NA; note - the Virgin Islands elect one representative to the
  US House of Representatives
Judicial branch: 
US District Court: 
  handles civil matters over $50,000, felonies (persons 15 years of age
  and over), and federal cases
Territorial Court: 
  handles civil matters up to $50,000, small claims, juvenile, domestic,
  misdemeanors, and traffic cases
Political parties and leaders: 
  Democratic Party, Marilyn STAPLETON; Independent Citizens' Movement
  (ICM), Virdin C. BROWN; Republican Party, Charlotte-Poole DAVIS
Member of: 
  ECLAC (associate), IOC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (territory of the US)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (territory of the US)
Flag: 
  white with a modified US coat of arms in the center between the large
  blue initials V and I; the coat of arms shows an eagle holding an
  olive branch in one talon and three arrows in the other with a
  superimposed shield of vertical red and white stripes below a blue
  panel

@Virgin Islands, Economy

Overview: 
  Tourism is the primary economic activity, accounting for more than 70%
  of GDP and 70% of employment. The manufacturing sector consists of
  textile, electronics, pharmaceutical, and watch assembly plants. The
  agricultural sector is small, most food being imported. International
  business and financial services are a small but growing component of
  the economy. One of the world's largest petroleum refineries is at
  Saint Croix.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $1.2 billion (1987)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $11,000 (1987)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  3.7% (1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $364.4 million 
expenditures: 
  $364.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1990 est.)
Exports: 
  $2.8 billion (f.o.b., 1990)
commodities: 
  refined petroleum products
partners: 
  US, Puerto Rico
Imports: 
  $3.3 billion (c.i.f., 1990)
commodities: 
  crude oil, foodstuffs, consumer goods, building materials
partners: 
  US, Puerto Rico
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 12% (year NA); accounts for NA% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  380,000 kW
production: 
  565 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  5,710 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  tourism, petroleum refining, watch assembly, rum distilling,
  construction, pharmaceuticals, textiles, electronics
Agriculture: 
  truck gardens, food crops (small scale), fruit, sorghum, Senepol
  cattle
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $42 million 
Currency: 
  1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  US currency is used
Fiscal year: 
  1 October - 30 September

@Virgin Islands, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  856 km 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Saint Croix - Christiansted, Frederiksted; Saint Thomas - Long Bay,
  Crown Bay, Red Hook; Saint John - Cruz Bay
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways : 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  2 
note: 
  international airports on Saint Thomas and Saint Croix
Telecommunications: 
  modern telephone system using fiber-optic cable, submarine cable,
  microwave radio, and satellite facilities; 58,931 telephones; 98,000
  radios; 63,000 TV sets in use; broadcast stations - 4 AM, 8 FM, 4 TV
  (1988)

@Virgin Islands, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Wake Island

Header
Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@Wake Island, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Micronesia, in the North Pacific Ocean, 3,700 km west of
  Honolulu, about two-thirds of the way between Hawaii and the Northern
  Mariana Islands
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  6.5 sq km 
land area: 
  6.5 sq km 
comparative area: 
  about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  19.3 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  claimed by the Republic of the Marshall Islands
Climate: 
  tropical
Terrain: 
  atoll of three coral islands built up on an underwater volcano;
  central lagoon is former crater, islands are part of the rim; average
  elevation less than 4 meters
Natural resources: 
  none 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  100% 
Irrigated land: 
  0 sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  subject to occasional typhoons
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean; emergency landing
  location for transpacific flights

@Wake Island, People

Population: 
  302 (July 1994 est.) 

@Wake Island, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Wake Island 
Digraph: 
  WQ
Type: 
  unincorporated territory of the US administered by the US Air Force
  (under an agreement with the US Department of Interior) since 24 June
  1972; presently administered by Base Commander, Major James ANDEL
  until August 1994, when Willis ALLEY will take over until July 1995
Capital: 
  none; administered from Washington, DC
Independence: 
  none (territory of the US)
Flag: 
  the US flag is used

@Wake Island, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic activity is limited to providing services to US military
  personnel and contractors located on the island. All food and
  manufactured goods must be imported.
Electricity: 
  supplied by US military

@Wake Island, Communications

Ports: 
  none; because of the reefs, there are only two offshore anchorages for
  large ships
Airports: 
total: 
  1 
usable: 
  1 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  satellite communications; 1 Autovon circuit off the Overseas Telephone
  System (OTS); Armed Forces Radio/Television Service (AFRTS) radio and
  television service provided by satellite; broadcast station - closed
  early 1992.
Note: 
  formerly an important commercial aviation base, now used by US
  military, some commercial cargo planes, as well as the US Army Space
  and Strategic Defense Command for missile launches

@Wake Island, Defense Forces

  defense is the responsibility of the US


@Wallis and Futuna

Header
Affiliation: 
  (overseas territory of France) 

@Wallis and Futuna, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia in the South Pacific Ocean, 4,600 km southwest of
  Honolulu, about two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  274 sq km 
land area: 
  274 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Ile Uvea (Wallis Island), Ile Futuna (Futuna Island), Ile
  Alofi, and 20 islets
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  129 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; hot, rainy season (November to April); cool, dry season (May
  to October)
Terrain: 
  volcanic origin; low hills
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  5% 
permanent crops: 
  20% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  75% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  both island groups have fringing reefs

@Wallis and Futuna, People

Population: 
  14,338 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.13% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25.74 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.26 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -9.18 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  26.26 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  71.72 years 
male: 
  71.08 years 
female: 
  72.4 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.23 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Wallisian(s), Futunan(s), or Wallis and Futuna Islanders 
adjective: 
  Wallisian, Futunan, or Wallis and Futuna Islander 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Polynesian 
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 
Languages: 
  French, Wallisian (indigenous Polynesian language)
Literacy: 
  all ages can read and write (1969)
total population: 
  50% 
male: 
  50% 
female: 
  51% 
Labor force: 
  NA 
by occupation: 
  agriculture, livestock, and fishing 80%, government 4% (est.)

@Wallis and Futuna, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Territory of the Wallis and Futuna Islands 
conventional short form: 
  Wallis and Futuna 
local long form: 
  Territoire des Iles Wallis et Futuna 
local short form: 
  Wallis et Futuna 
Digraph: 
  WF
Type: 
  overseas territory of France 
Capital: 
  Mata-Utu (on Ile Uvea) 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
Independence: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
Constitution: 
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)
Legal system: 
  French legal system
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Francois MITTERRAND (since 21 May 1981) 
head of government: 
  High Administrator Philippe LEGRIX (since NA); President of the
  Territorial Assembly Soane Noni UHILA (since NA March 1992) 
cabinet: 
  Council of the Territory consists of 3 kings and 3 members appointed
  by the high administrator on advice of the Territorial Assembly
note: 
  there are three traditional kings with limited powers
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Territorial Assembly (Assemblee Territoriale): 
  elections last held 15 March 1987 (next to be held NA March 1992);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (20 total) RPR 7, UPL
  5, UDF 4, UNF 4
French Senate: 
  elections last held 24 September 1989 (next to be held by NA September
  1998); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1 total) RPR 1
French National Assembly: 
  elections last held 21 and 28 March 1992 (next to be held by NA
  September 1996); results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (1
  total) MRG 1
Judicial branch: 
  none; justice generally administered under French law by the chief
  administrator, but the three traditional kings administer customary
  law and there is a magistrate in Mata-Utu
Political parties and leaders: 
  Rally for the Republic (RPR); Union Populaire Locale (UPL); Union Pour
  la Democratie Francaise (UDF); Lua kae tahi (Giscardians); Mouvement
  des Radicaux de Gauche (MRG)
Member of: 
  FZ, SPC 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
US diplomatic representation: 
  none (overseas territory of France)
Flag: 
  the flag of France is used

@Wallis and Futuna, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy is limited to traditional subsistence agriculture, with
  about 80% of the labor force earning its livelihood from agriculture
  (coconuts and vegetables), livestock (mostly pigs), and fishing. About
  4% of the population is employed in government. Revenues come from
  French Government subsidies, licensing of fishing rights to Japan and
  South Korea, import taxes, and remittances from expatriate workers in
  New Caledonia. Wallis and Futuna imports food, fuel, clothing,
  machinery, and transport equipment, but its exports are negligible,
  consisting of copra and handicrafts.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $25 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $1,500 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $2.7 million 
expenditures: 
  $2.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1983 est.)
Exports: 
  negligible
commodities: 
  copra, handicrafts
partners: 
  NA
Imports: 
  $13.3 million (c.i.f., 1984)
commodities: 
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods, transportation equipment, fuel
partners: 
  France, Australia, New Zealand
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,200 kW
production: 
  1 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  70 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  copra, handicrafts, fishing, lumber
Agriculture: 
  dominated by coconut production, with subsistence crops of yams, taro,
  bananas, and herds of pigs and goats
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  Western (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments
  (1970-89), $118 million 
Currency: 
  1 CFP franc (CFPF) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per US$1 - 107.63
  (January 1994), 102.96 (1993), 96.24 (1992), 102.57 (1991), 99.0
  (1990), 115.99 (1989); note - linked at the rate of 18.18 to the
  French franc
Fiscal year: 
  NA

@Wallis and Futuna, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  120 km (Ile Uvea 100 km, Ile Futuna 20km)
paved: 
  16 km (on Il Uvea)
unpaved: 
  104 km (Ile Uvea 84 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)
Inland waterways: 
  none
Ports: 
  Mata-Utu, Leava
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  225 telephones; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no TV

@Wallis and Futuna, Defense Forces

Note: 
  defense is the responsibility of France


@West Bank

Header
  The war between Israel and Egypt, Syria, and Jordan in June 1967 ended
  with Israel in control of the West Bank, East Jerusalem, the Gaza
  Strip, the Sinai Peninsula, and the Golan Heights. Israel withdrew
  from the Sinai Peninsula pursuant to a 1979 peace treaty with Egypt.
  The Israeli-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
  Arrangements ("the DOP"), signed in Washington on 13 September 1993,
  provides for a transitional period not exceeding five years of
  Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip and the West
  Bank. Under the DOP, final status negotiations are to begin no later
  than the beginning of the third year of the transitional period.

@West Bank, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, between Jordan and Israel
Map references: 
  Middle East 
Area: 
total area: 
  5,860 sq km 
land area: 
  5,640 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Delaware
note: 
  includes West Bank, East Jerusalem, Latrun Salient, Jerusalem No Man's
  Land, and the northwest quarter of the Dead Sea, but excludes Mt.
  Scopus
Land boundaries: 
  total 404 km, Israel 307 km, Jordan 97 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli occupied with interim status
  subject to Israeli/Palestinian negotiations - final status to be
  determined
Climate: 
  temperate, temperature and precipitation vary with altitude, warm to
  hot summers, cool to mild winters
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged dissected upland, some vegetation in west, but barren in
  east
Natural resources: 
  negligible 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  27% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  32% 
forest and woodland: 
  1% 
other: 
  40% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  NA 
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  NA 
Note: 
  landlocked; highlands are main recharge area for Israel's coastal
  aquifers; there are 200 Jewish settlements and civilian land use sites
  in the West Bank and 25 in East Jerusalem (April 1994)

@West Bank, People

Population: 
  1,443,790 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  in addition, there are 110,500 Jewish settlers in the West Bank and
  144,100 in East Jerusalem (1994 est.)
Population growth rate: 
  2.68% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.48 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.11 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  33.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  70.39 years 
male: 
  68.88 years 
female: 
  71.98 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.2 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  NA 
adjective: 
  NA 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Palestinian Arab and other 88%, Jewish 12% 
Religions: 
  Muslim 80% (predominantly Sunni), Jewish 12%, Christian and other 8% 
Languages: 
  Arabic, Hebrew spoken by Israeli settlers, English widely understood
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  NA
by occupation: 
  construction 28.2%, agriculture 21.8%, industry 14.5%, commerce,
  restaurants, and hotels 12.6%, other services 22.9% (1991)
note: 
  excluding Jewish settlers

@West Bank, Government

Note: 
  Under the Israeli-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
  Self-Government Arragements ("the DOP"), Israel agreed to transfer
  certain powers and responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority, and
  subsequently to an elected Palestinian Council, as part of interim
  self-governing arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A
  transfer of powers and responsibilities for the Gaza Strip and Jericho
  has taken place pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4 May 1994 Cairo Agreement
  on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area. The DOP provides that Israel
  will retain responsibility during the transitional period for external
  security and for internal security and public order of settlements and
  Israelis. Final status is to be determined through direct negotiations
  within five years.
Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  West Bank 
Digraph: 
  WE

@West Bank, Economy

Overview: 
  Economic progress in the West Bank has been hampered by Israeli
  military administration and the effects of the Palestinian uprising
  (intifadah). Industries using advanced technology or requiring sizable
  investment have been discouraged by a lack of local capital and
  restrictive Israeli policies. Capital investment consists largely of
  residential housing, not productive assets that would enable local
  Palestinian firms to compete with Israeli industry. A major share of
  GNP has traditionally been derived from remittances of workers
  employed in Israel and Persian Gulf states. Such transfers from the
  Gulf dropped after Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990. In the wake of
  the Persian Gulf crisis, many Palestinians have returned to the West
  Bank, increasing unemployment, and export revenues have dropped
  because of the decline of markets in Jordan and the Gulf states.
  Israeli measures to curtail the intifadah also have added to
  unemployment and lowered living standards. The area's economic
  situation has worsened since Israel's partial closure of the
  territories in 1993.
National product: 
  GNP - exchange rate conversion - $2 billion (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -7% (1991 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,050 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  12% (1991 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  15% (1991 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $43.4 million 
expenditures: 
  $43.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (FY90)
Exports: 
  $175 million (f.o.b., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  olives, fruit, vegetables
partners: 
  Jordan, Israel
Imports: 
  $775 million (c.i.f., 1991 est.)
commodities: 
  food, consumer goods, construction materials
partners: 
  Jordan, Israel
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1% (1991); accounts for about 6% of GNP
Electricity: 
  power supplied by Israel
Industries: 
  generally small family businesses that produce cement, textiles, soap,
  olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs; the Israelis have
  established some small-scale modern industries in the settlements and
  industrial centers
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 23% of GNP; olives, citrus and other fruits,
  vegetables, beef, and dairy products
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot; 1 Jordanian dinar (JD) =
  1,000 fils
Exchange rates: 
  new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1 - 2.9760 (February 1994), 2.8301
  (1993), 2.4591 (1992), 2.2791 (1991), 2.0162 (1990), 1.9164 (1989);
  Jordanian dinars (JD) per US$1 - 0.7019 (February 1994), 0.6928
  (1993), 0.6797 (1992), 0.6808 (1991), 0.6636 (1990), 0.5704 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

@West Bank, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
note: 
  small road network, Israelis developing east-west axial highways to
  service new settlements
Airports: 
total: 
  2 
usable: 
  2 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  2 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  1 
Telecommunications: 
  open-wire telephone system currently being upgraded; broadcast
  stations - no AM, no FM, no TV

@West Bank, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  NA
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Western Sahara, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, along the Atlantic Ocean, between Morocco and
  Mauritania
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  266,000 sq km 
land area: 
  266,000 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Colorado
Land boundaries: 
  total 2,046 km, Algeria 42 km, Mauritania 1,561 km, Morocco 443 km 
Coastline: 
  1,110 km 
Maritime claims: 
  contingent upon resolution of sovereignty issue
International disputes: 
  claimed and administered by Morocco, but sovereignty is unresolved and
  the UN is attempting to hold a referendum on the issue; the
  UN-administered cease-fire has been currently in effect since
  September 1991
Climate: 
  hot, dry desert; rain is rare; cold offshore air currents produce fog
  and heavy dew
Terrain: 
  mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or sandy surfaces
  rising to small mountains in south and northeast
Natural resources: 
  phosphates, iron ore 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  0% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  19% 
forest and woodland: 
  0% 
other: 
  81% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  sparse water and arable land
natural hazards: 
  hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind can occur during winter and
  spring; widespread harmattan haze exists 60% of time, often severely
  restricting visibility
international agreements: 
  NA 

@Western Sahara, People

Population: 
  211,877 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.5% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  47.22 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  19.04 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -3.21 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  152.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  45.59 years 
male: 
  44.66 years 
female: 
  46.83 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.96 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Sahrawi(s), Sahraoui(s) 
adjective: 
  Sahrawian, Sahraouian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab, Berber 
Religions: 
  Muslim 
Languages: 
  Hassaniya Arabic, Moroccan Arabic 
Literacy: 
total population: 
  NA%
male: 
  NA%
female: 
  NA%
Labor force: 
  12,000 
by occupation: 
  animal husbandry and subsistence farming 50%

@Western Sahara, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  none 
conventional short form: 
  Western Sahara 
Digraph: 
  WI
Type: 
  legal status of territory and question of sovereignty unresolved;
  territory contested by Morocco and Polisario Front (Popular Front for
  the Liberation of the Saguia el Hamra and Rio de Oro), which in
  February 1976 formally proclaimed a government in exile of the Sahrawi
  Arab Democratic Republic (SADR); territory partitioned between Morocco
  and Mauritania in April 1976, with Morocco acquiring northern
  two-thirds; Mauritania, under pressure from Polisario guerrillas,
  abandoned all claims to its portion in August 1979; Morocco moved to
  occupy that sector shortly thereafter and has since asserted
  administrative control; the Polisario's government in exile was seated
  as an OAU member in 1984; guerrilla activities continued sporadically,
  until a UN-monitored cease-fire was implemented 6 September 1991
Capital: 
  none 
Administrative divisions: 
  none (under de facto control of Morocco)
Executive branch: 
  none 
Member of: 
  none 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
  none
US diplomatic representation: 
  none

@Western Sahara, Economy

Overview: 
  Western Sahara, a territory poor in natural resources and having
  little rainfall, has a per capita GDP of roughly $300. Pastoral
  nomadism, fishing, and phosphate mining are the principal sources of
  income for the population. Most of the food for the urban population
  must be imported. All trade and other economic activities are
  controlled by the Moroccan Government.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $60 million (1991 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $300 (1991 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $8 million (f.o.b., 1982 est.)
commodities: 
  phosphates 62%
partners: 
  Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara, so trade partners are
  included in overall Moroccan accounts
Imports: 
  $30 million (c.i.f., 1982 est.)
commodities: 
  fuel for fishing fleet, foodstuffs
partners: 
  Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara, so trade partners are
  included in overall Moroccan accounts
External debt: 
  $NA
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  60,000 kW
production: 
  79 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  425 kWh (1989)
Industries: 
  phosphate mining, fishing, handicrafts
Agriculture: 
  limited largely to subsistence agriculture; some barley is grown in
  nondrought years; fruit and vegetables are grown in the few oases;
  food imports are essential; camels, sheep, and goats are kept by the
  nomadic natives; cash economy exists largely for the garrison forces
Economic aid: 
  $NA
Currency: 
  1 Moroccan dirham (DH) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Moroccan dirhams (DH) per US$1 - 9.669 (January 1994), 9.299 (1993),
  8.538 (1992), 8.707 (1991), 8.242 (1990), 8.488 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  NA

@Western Sahara, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  6,200 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,450 km; improved, unimproved earth, tracks 4,750 km 
Ports: 
  El Aaiun, Ad Dakhla
Airports: 
total: 
  14 
usable: 
  14 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  5 
Telecommunications: 
  sparse and limited system; tied into Morocco's system by microwave
  radio relay, troposcatter, and 2 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth
  stations linked to Rabat, Morocco; 2,000 telephones; broadcast
  stations - 2 AM, no FM, 2 TV

@Western Sahara, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  NA
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@Western Samoa, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, 4,300 km southwest of Honolulu in the South
  Pacific Ocean, about halfway between Hawaii and New Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,860 sq km 
land area: 
  2,850 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Rhode Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km  
Coastline: 
  403 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical; rainy season (October to March), dry season (May to October)
Terrain: 
  narrow coastal plain with volcanic, rocky, rugged mountains in
  interior
Natural resources: 
  hardwood forests, fish 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  19% 
permanent crops: 
  24% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  47% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion
natural hazards: 
  subject to occasional typhoons; active volcanism
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity; signed, but not ratified - Climate Change,
  Law of the Sea

@Western Samoa, People

Population: 
  204,447 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.38% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  32.41 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.02 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  37 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.97 years 
male: 
  65.59 years 
female: 
  70.48 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.16 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Western Samoan(s) 
adjective: 
  Western Samoan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Samoan 92.6%, Euronesians 7% (persons of European and Polynesian
  blood), Europeans 0.4% 
Religions: 
  Christian 99.7% (about half of population associated with the London
  Missionary Society; includes Congregational, Roman Catholic,
  Methodist, Latter Day Saints, Seventh-Day Adventist)
Languages: 
  Samoan (Polynesian), English 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1971)
total population: 
  97% 
male: 
  97% 
female: 
  97% 
Labor force: 
  38,000 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 22,000 (1987 est.)

@Western Samoa, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Independent State of Western Samoa 
conventional short form: 
  Western Samoa 
Digraph: 
  WS
Type: 
  constitutional monarchy under native chief
Capital: 
  Apia 
Administrative divisions: 
  11 districts; A'ana, Aiga-i-le-Tai, Atua, Fa'asaleleaga, Gaga'emauga,
  Gagaifomauga, Palauli, Satupa'itea, Tuamasaga, Va'a-o-Fonoti,
  Vaisigano
Independence: 
  1 January 1962 (from UN trusteeship administered by New Zealand)
National holiday: 
  National Day, 1 June (1962) 
Constitution: 
  1 January 1962
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and local customs; judicial review of
  legislative acts with respect to fundamental rights of the citizen;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  21 years of age; universal, but only matai (head of family) are able
  to run for the Legislative Assembly
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  Chief Susuga Malietoa TANUMAFILI II (Co-Chief of State from 1 January
  1962 until becoming sole Chief of State on 5 April 1963) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister TOFILAU Eti Alesana (since 7 April 1988) 
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the head of state with the prime minister's
  advice
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Legislative Assembly (Fono): 
  elections last held 5 April 1991 (next to be held by NA 1996); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (47 total) HRPP 28, SNDP 18,
  independents 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court, Court of Appeal 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Human Rights Protection Party (HRPP), TOFILAU Eti Alesana, chairman;
  Samoan National Development Party (SNDP), TAPUA Tamasese Efi, chairman
Member of: 
  ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IMF,
  INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, LORCS, SPARTECA, SPC, SPF, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Neroni SLADE 
chancery: 
  820 Second Avenue, Suite 800, New York, NY 10017 
telephone: 
  (212) 599-6196 or 6197 
FAX: 
  (212) 972-3970 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  the ambassador to New Zealand is accredited to Western Samoa 
embassy: 
  5th floor, Beach Road, Apia 
mailing address: 
  P.O. Box 3430, Apia 
telephone: 
  (685) 21-631 
FAX: 
  (685) 22-030 
Flag: 
  red with a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side quadrant bearing
  five white five-pointed stars representing the Southern Cross
  constellation

@Western Samoa, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture employs more than half of the labor force, contributes 50%
  to GDP, and furnishes 90% of exports. The bulk of export earnings
  comes from the sale of coconut oil and copra. The economy depends on
  emigrant remittances and foreign aid to support a level of imports
  much greater than export earnings. Tourism has become the most
  important growth industry, and construction of the first international
  hotel is under way. The economy continued to falter in 1993, as
  remittances and tourist earnings fell off. A fungal plant disease
  severely damaged the taro crop, the primary food and export crop.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $400 million (1992 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -4.3% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $2,000 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  7% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $95.3 million 
expenditures: 
  $95.4 million, including capital expenditures of $41 million (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $5.7 million (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  coconut oil and cream, taro, copra, cocoa
partners: 
  New Zealand 34%, American Samoa 21%, Germany 18%, Australia 11%
Imports: 
  $11.5 million (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  intermediate goods 58%, food 17%, capital goods 12%
partners: 
  New Zealand 37%, Australia 25%, Japan 11%, Fiji 9%
External debt: 
  $83 million (December 1990 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -0.3% (1992 est.); accounts for 16% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  29,000 kW
production: 
  45 million kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  240 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  timber, tourism, food processing, fishing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for about 50% of GDP; coconuts, fruit (including bananas,
  taro, yams)
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $18 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $306
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $4 million 
Currency: 
  1 tala (WS$) = 100 sene
Exchange rates: 
  tala (WS$) per US$1 - 2.5920 (January 1994), 2.5681 (1993), 2.4655
  (1992), 2.3975 (1991), 2.3095 (1990), 2.2686 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Western Samoa, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  2,042 km 
paved: 
  375 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 1,667 km 
Ports: 
  Apia
Merchant marine: 
  1 roll on/roll off cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,838
  GRT/5,536 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  3 
usable: 
  3 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  1 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  0 
Telecommunications: 
  7,500 telephones; 70,000 radios; broadcast stations - 1 AM, no FM, no
  TV; 1 Pacific Ocean INTELSAT ground station

@Western Samoa, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Department of Police and Prisons 
Defense expenditures: 
  $NA, NA% of GDP


@World, Geography

Map references: 
  Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  510.072 million sq km 
land area: 
  148.94 million sq km 
water area: 
  361.132 million sq km 
comparative area: 
  land area about 16 times the size of the US
note: 
  70.8% of the world is water, 29.2% is land
Land boundaries: 
  the land boundaries in the world total 250,883.64 km (not counting
  shared boundaries twice)
Coastline: 
  356,000 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm claimed by most but can vary
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth claimed by most or to depth of exploitation, others claim
  200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm claimed by most but can vary
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm claimed by most but can vary
territorial sea: 
  12 nm claimed by most but can vary
note: 
  boundary situations with neighboring states prevent many countries
  from extending their fishing or economic zones to a full 200 nm; 42
  nations and other areas that are landlocked include Afghanistan,
  Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia,
  Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Czech
  Republic, Ethiopia, Holy See (Vatican City), Hungary, Kazakhstan,
  Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malawi, Mali,
  Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda, San Marino,
  Slovakia, Swaziland, Switzerland, Tajikistan, The Former Yugoslav
  Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan, West Bank,
  Zambia, Zimbabwe
Climate: 
  two large areas of polar climates separated by two rather narrow
  temperate zones from a wide equatorial band of tropical to subtropical
  climates
Terrain: 
  highest elevation is Mt. Everest at 8,848 meters and lowest depression
  is the Dead Sea at 392 meters below sea level; greatest ocean depth is
  the Marianas Trench at 10,924 meters
Natural resources: 
  the rapid using up of nonrenewable mineral resources, the depletion of
  forest areas and wetlands, the extinction of animal and plant species,
  and the deterioration in air and water quality (especially in Eastern
  Europe and the former USSR) pose serious long-term problems that
  governments and peoples are only beginning to address  
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  1% 
meadows and pastures: 
  24% 
forest and woodland: 
  31% 
other: 
  34% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
current issues: 
  large areas subject to overpopulation, industrial disasters, pollution
  (air, water, acid rain, toxic substances), loss of vegetation
  (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, soil
  degradation, soil depletion, erosion
natural hazards: 
  large areas subject to severe weather (tropical cyclones), natural
  disasters (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions)
international agreements: 
  20 selected international environmental agreements included under the
  Environment entry for each country and in Appendix E: Selected
  International Environmental Agreements

@World, People

Population: 
  5,643,289,771 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.5% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  25 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  9 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  65 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  62 years 
male: 
  61 years 
female: 
  64 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.1 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.);
total population: 
  82% 
male: 
  68% 
female: 
  75% 
Labor force: 
  2.24 billion (1992)
by occupation: 
  NA

@World, Government

Digraph: 
  XX
Administrative divisions: 
  265 sovereign nations, dependent areas, other, and miscellaneous
  entries
Legal system: 
  varies by individual country; 182 are parties to the United Nations
  International Court of Justice (ICJ or World Court)

@World, Economy

Overview: 
  Real global output - gross world product (GWP) - rose roughly 2% in
  1993, with results varying widely among regions and countries. Average
  growth of 1% in the GDP of industrialized countries (57% of GWP in
  1993) and average growth of 6% in the GDP of less developed countries
  (37% of GWP) were partly offset by a further 10% drop in the GDP of
  the former USSR/Eastern Europe area (now only 6% of GWP). Within the
  industrialized world the US posted a 3% growth rate whereas both Japan
  and the 12-member European Union (formerly the European Community) had
  zero growth. With the notable exception of Japan at 2.5%, unemployment
  was typically 6-11% in the industrial world. The US accounted for 22%
  of GWP in 1993; Western Europe accounted for 22.5%; and Japan
  accounted for 9%. These are the three "economic superpowers" which are
  presumably destined to compete for mastery in international markets on
  into the 21st century. As for the less developed countries, China,
  India, and the Four Dragons--South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and
  Singapore--once again posted good records; however, many other
  countries, especially in Africa, continued to suffer from drought,
  rapid population growth, inflation, and civil strife. Central Europe,
  especially Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, made considerable
  progress in moving toward "market-friendly" economies, whereas the 15
  ex-Soviet countries typically experienced further declines in output
  of 10-15%. Externally, the nation-state, as a bedrock
  economic-political institution, is steadily losing control over
  international flows of people, goods, funds, and technology.
  Internally, the central government in a number of cases is losing
  control over resources as separatist regional movements - typically
  based on ethnicity - gain momentum, e.g., in the successor states of
  the former Soviet Union, in former Yugoslavia, and in India. In
  Western Europe, governments face the difficult political problem of
  channeling resources away from welfare programs in order to increase
  investment and strengthen incentives to seek employment. The addition
  of nearly 100 million people each year to an already overcrowded globe
  is exacerbating the problems of pollution, desertification,
  underemployment, epidemics, and famine. Because of their own internal
  problems, the industrialized countries have inadequate resources to
  deal effectively with the poorer areas of the world, which, at least
  from the economic point of view, are becoming further marginalized.
  (For the specific economic problems of each country, see the
  individual country entries in this volume.)
National product: 
  GWP (gross world product) - purchasing power equivalent - $29 trillion
  (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $5,200 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
developed countries: 
  5% (1993 est.)
developing countries: 
  50% (1993 est.)
note: 
  these figures vary widely in individual cases
Unemployment rate: 
  developed countries typically 6%-11%; developing countries, extensive
  unemployment and underemployment (1993)
Exports: 
  $3.64 trillion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and services
partners: 
  in value, about 75% of exports from the developed countries
Imports: 
  $3.82 trillion (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and services
partners: 
  in value, about 75% of imports by the developed countries
External debt: 
  $1 trillion for less developed countries (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -1% (1992 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,864,000,000 kW
production: 
  11.45 trillion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  2,150 kWh (1990)
Industries: 
  industry worldwide is dominated by the onrush of technology,
  especially in computers, robotics, telecommunications, and medicines
  and medical equipment; most of these advances take place in OECD
  nations; only a small portion of non-OECD countries have succeeded in
  rapidly adjusting to these technological forces, and the technological
  gap between the industrial nations and the less-developed countries
  continues to widen; the rapid development of new industrial (and
  agricultural) technology is complicating already grim environmental
  problems
Agriculture: 
  the production of major food crops has increased substantially in the
  last 20 years; the annual production of cereals, for instance, has
  risen by 50%, from about 1.2 billion metric tons to about 1.8 billion
  metric tons; production increases have resulted mainly from increased
  yields rather than increases in planted areas; while global production
  is sufficient for aggregate demand, about one-fifth of the world's
  population remains malnourished, primarily because local production
  cannot adequately provide for large and rapidly growing populations,
  which are too poor to pay for food imports; conditions are especially
  bad in Africa where drought in recent years has intensified the
  consequences of overpopulation
Economic aid: 
  $NA

@World, Communications

Railroads: 
  239,430 km of narrow gauge track; 710,754 km of standard gauge track;
  251,153 km of broad gauge track; includes about 190,000 to 195,000 km
  of electrified routes of which 147,760 km are in Europe, 24,509 km in
  the Far East, 11,050 km in Africa, 4,223 km in South America, and only
  4,160 km in North America; fastest speed in daily service is 300 km/hr
  attained by France's SNCF TGV-Atlantique line
Highways: 
total: 
  NA 
paved: 
  NA 
unpaved: 
  NA 
Ports: 
  Mina' al Ahmadi (Kuwait), Chiba, Houston, Kawasaki, Kobe, Marseille,
  New Orleans, New York, Rotterdam, Yokohama
Merchant marine: 
  23,943 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 397,225,000 GRT/652,025,000
  DWT, bulk carrier 5,473, freighter 12,581, passenger-cargo 347, tanker
  5,542 (all data as of January 1992)

@World, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  ground, maritime, and air forces at all levels of technology
Defense expenditures: 
  somewhat less than $1.0 trillion, 3% of total world output; decline of
  5%-10% (1993 est.)


@Yemen, Geography

Location: 
  Middle East, along the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea, south of Saudi
  Arabia
Map references: 
  Africa, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  527,970 sq km 
land area: 
  527,970 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than twice the size of Wyoming
note: 
  includes Perim, Socotra, the former Yemen Arab Republic (YAR or North
  Yemen), and the former People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY or
  South Yemen)
Land boundaries: 
  total 1,746 km, Oman 288 km, Saudi Arabia 1,458 km 
Coastline: 
  1,906 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  18 nm in the North; 24 nm in the South
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth in the North; 200 nm in the South or to the edge of the
  continental margin
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  undefined section of boundary with Saudi Arabia; a treaty with Oman
  defining the Yemeni-Omani boundary was ratified in December 1992
Climate: 
  mostly desert; hot and humid along west coast; temperate in western
  mountains affected by seasonal monsoon; extraordinarily hot, dry,
  harsh desert in east
Terrain: 
  narrow coastal plain backed by flat-topped hills and rugged mountains;
  dissected upland desert plains in center slope into the desert
  interior of the Arabian Peninsula
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, fish, rock salt, marble, small deposits of coal, gold,
  lead, nickel, and copper, fertile soil in west 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  6% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  30% 
forest and woodland: 
  7% 
other: 
  57% 
Irrigated land: 
  3,100 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  scarcity of natural freshwater resources (shortages of potable water);
  overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  subject to sandstorms and dust storms in summer
international agreements: 
  party to - Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea; signed, but not
  ratified - Biodiversity, Climate Change
Note: 
  controls Bab el Mandeb, the strait linking the Red Sea and the Gulf of
  Aden, one of world's most active shipping lanes

@Yemen, People

Population: 
  11,105,202 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.34% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  50.72 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  14.94 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -2.44 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  112.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  51.47 years 
male: 
  50.34 years 
female: 
  52.65 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  7.2 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Yemeni(s) 
adjective: 
  Yemeni 
Ethnic divisions: 
  predominantly Arab; Afro-Arab concentrations in coastal locations;
  South Asians in southern regions; small European communities in major
  metropolitan areas; 60,000 (est.) Somali refugees encamped near Aden
Religions: 
  Muslim including Sha'fi (Sunni) and Zaydi (Shi'a), Jewish, Christian,
  Hindu 
Languages: 
  Arabic 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  38% 
male: 
  53% 
female: 
  26% 
Labor force: 
  no reliable estimates exist, most people are employed in agriculture
  and herding or as expatriate laborers; services, construction,
  industry, and commerce account for less than half of the labor force

@Yemen, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Yemen 
conventional short form: 
  Yemen 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Yamaniyah 
local short form: 
  Al Yaman 
Digraph: 
  YM
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Sanaa 
Administrative divisions: 
  17 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Abyan, Adan, Al
  Bayda, Al Hudaydah, Al Jawf, Al Mahrah, Al Mahwit, Dhamar, Hadramaut,
  Hajjah, Ibb, Lahij, Marib, Sadah, Sana, Shabwah, Taizz
note: 
  there may be a new capital district of Sana
Independence: 
  22 May 1990 Republic of Yemen was established on 22 May 1990 with the
  merger of the Yemen Arab Republic {Yemen (Sanaa) or North Yemen} and
  the Marxist-dominated People's Democratic Republic of Yemen {Yemen
  (Aden) or South Yemen}; previously North Yemen had become independent
  on NA November 1918 (from the Ottoman Empire) and South Yemen had
  become independent on 30 November 1967 (from the UK)
National holiday: 
  Proclamation of the Republic, 22 May (1990) 
Constitution: 
  16 May 1991
Legal system: 
  based on Islamic law, Turkish law, English common law, and local
  customary law; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Ali Abdallah SALIH (since 22 May 1990, the former president
  of North Yemen); note - Sanaa dismissed Vice President Ali Salim
  al-BIDH,  Prime Minister Haydar Abu Bakr al-ATTAS (the former
  president of South Yemen), and 14 other southern officials following
  the outbreak of civil war on 4 May 1994 
five-member Presidential Council: 
  president, vice president, two members from General People's Congress
  party, two members from Yemeni Socialist Party, and one member from
  Yemeni Grouping for Reform, or Islaah party 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
House of Representatives: 
  elections last held 27 April 1993 (next to be held NA); results -
  percent of vote NA; seats - (301 total) GPC 124, YSP 55, Islaah 61,
  Ba'thist parties 7, Nasserist parties 4, Hizb al-Haqq 2, Independents
  47, election nullified 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Ba'thist parties; General People's Congress (GPC), Ali Abdallah SALIH;
  Hizb al Haqq, Ibrahim al-WAZIR, Sheikh Ahmad ibn Ali SHAMI (Secretary
  General); Nasserist parties; Yemeni Socialist Party (YSP), Ali Salim
  al-BIDH; Yemeni Grouping for Reform or Islaah, Shaykh Abdallah bin
  Husayn al-AHMAR
Other political or pressure groups: 
  NA
Member of: 
  ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM,
  OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Muhsin Ahmad AL-AYNI 
chancery: 
  Suite 705, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037 
telephone: 
  (202) 965-4760 or 4761 
FAX: 
  (202) 337-2017 
consulate general(s): 
  Detroit 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Arthur H. HUGHES 
embassy: 
  Dhahr Himyar Zone, Sheraton Hotel District, Sanaa 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 22347 Sanaa or Sanaa, Department of State, Washington, DC
  20521-6330 
telephone: 
  [967] (1) 238-842 through 238-852 
FAX: 
  [967] (1) 251-563 
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black; similar
  to the flag of Syria which has two green stars and of Iraq which has
  three green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line
  centered in the white band; also similar to the flag of Egypt which
  has a symbolic eagle centered in the white band

@Yemen, Economy

Overview: 
  Whereas the northern city Sanaa is the political capital of a united
  Yemen, the southern city Aden, with its refinery and port facilities,
  is the economic and commercial capital. Future economic development
  depends heavily on Western-assisted development of its moderate oil
  resources. Former South Yemen's willingness to merge stemmed partly
  from the steady decline in Soviet economic support. The low level of
  domestic industry and agriculture have made northern Yemen dependent
  on imports for practically all of its essential needs. Large trade
  deficits have been compensated for by remittances from Yemenis working
  abroad and by foreign aid. Because of the Gulf crisis, remittances
  have dropped substantially. Once self-sufficient in food production,
  northern Yemen has become a major importer. Land once used for export
  crops - cotton, fruit, and vegetables - has been turned over to
  growing a shrub called qat, whose leaves are chewed for their
  stimulant effect by Yemenis and which has no  significant export
  market. Economic growth in former South Yemen has been constrained by
  a lack of incentives, partly stemming from centralized control over
  production decisions, investment allocation, and import choices.
  Nominal growth in 1994-95 is apt to be under 3% annually because of
  low oil prices and political deadlock that is causing a lack of
  economic cooperation and leadership.
National product: 
  GDP - exchange rate conversion - $9 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  3.1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  55% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  30% (December 1992)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $695 million (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  crude oil, cotton, coffee, hides, vegetables, dried and salted fish
partners: 
  Italy 55%, US 32%, Jordan 5% (1991)
Imports: 
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  textiles and other manufactured consumer goods, petroleum products,
  sugar, grain, flour, other foodstuffs, cement, machinery, chemicals
partners: 
  UAE 6%, Japan 6%, Saudi Arabia 6%, Kuwait 6%, US 6% (1991)
External debt: 
  $7 billion (1993)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%, accounts for 18% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  714,000 kW
production: 
  1.224 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  120 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  crude oil production and petroleum refining; small-scale production of
  cotton textiles and leather goods; food processing; handicrafts; small
  aluminum products factory; cement
Agriculture: 
  accounted for 26% of GDP; products - grain, fruits, vegetables, qat
  (mildly narcotic shrub), coffee, cotton, dairy, poultry, meat, fish;
  not self-sufficient in grain
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $389 million; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $2
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $3.2 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $2.4 billion 
Currency: 
  Yemeni rial (new currency);  1 North Yemeni riyal (YR) = 100 fils; 1
  South Yemeni dinar (YD) = 1,000 fils
note: 
  following the establishment of the Republic of Yemen on 22 May 1990,
  the North Yemeni riyal and the South Yemeni dinar are to be replaced
  with a new Yemeni rial
Exchange rates: 
  Yemeni rials per US$1 - 12.0 (official); 70 (market rate, April 1994)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Yemen, Communications

Highways: 
total: 
  15,500 km 
paved: 
  4,000 km 
unpaved: 
  natural surface 11,500 km 
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 644 km; petroleum products 32 km 
Ports: 
  Aden, Al Hudaydah, Al Khalf, Al Mukalla, Mocha, Nishtun, Ra's Kathib,
  Salif
Merchant marine: 
  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,309 GRT/6,568 DWT, cargo 2, oil
  tanker 1 
Airports: 
total: 
  46 
usable: 
  40 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  10 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  18 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  11 
Telecommunications: 
  since unification in 1990, efforts are still being made to create a
  national domestic civil telecommunications network; the network
  consists of microwave radio relay, cable and troposcatter; 65,000
  telephones (est.); broadcast stations - 4 AM, 1 FM, 10 TV; satellite
  earth stations - 2 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT, 1
  Intersputnik, 2 ARABSAT; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia, and
  Djibouti

@Yemen, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 2,142,519; fit for military service 1,219,985; reach
  military age (14) annually 137,497 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $762 million, 14% of GDP (1992)


@Zaire, Geography

Location: 
  Central Africa, between Congo and Zambia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,345,410 sq km 
land area: 
  2,267,600 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly more than one-quarter the size of US
Land boundaries: 
  total 10,271 km, Angola 2,511 km, Burundi 233 km, Central African
  Republic 1,577 km, Congo 2,410 km, Rwanda 217 km, Sudan 628 km, Uganda
  765 km, Zambia 1,930 km 
Coastline: 
  37 km 
Maritime claims: 
exclusive fishing zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Tanzania-Zaire-Zambia tripoint in Lake Tanganyika may no longer be
  indefinite since it is reported that the indefinite section of the
  Zaire-Zambia boundary has been settled; long section with Congo along
  the Congo River is indefinite (no division of the river or its islands
  has been made)
Climate: 
  tropical; hot and humid in equatorial river basin; cooler and drier in
  southern highlands; cooler and wetter in eastern highlands; north of
  Equator - wet season April to October, dry season December to
  February; south of Equator - wet season November to March, dry season
  April to October
Terrain: 
  vast central basin is a low-lying plateau; mountains in east
Natural resources: 
  cobalt, copper, cadmium, petroleum, industrial and gem diamonds, gold,
  silver, zinc, manganese, tin, germanium, uranium, radium, bauxite,
  iron ore, coal, hydropower potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  4% 
forest and woodland: 
  78% 
other: 
  15% 
Irrigated land: 
  100 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  poaching threatens wildlife populations; water pollution;
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  periodic droughts in south
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Tropical Timber; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Environmental Modification
Note: 
  straddles Equator; very narrow strip of land that controls the lower
  Congo River and is only outlet to South Atlantic Ocean; dense tropical
  rain forest in central river basin and eastern highlands

@Zaire, People

Population: 
  42,684,091 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.17% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  48.39 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  16.74 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  110.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  47.4 years 
male: 
  45.57 years 
female: 
  49.29 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.7 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Zairian(s) 
adjective: 
  Zairian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  over 200 African ethnic groups, the majority are Bantu; four largest
  tribes - Mongo, Luba, Kongo (all Bantu), and the Mangbetu-Azande
  (Hamitic) make up about 45% of the population
Religions: 
  Roman Catholic 50%, Protestant 20%, Kimbanguist 10%, Muslim 10%, other
  syncretic sects and traditional beliefs 10% 
Languages: 
  French, Lingala, Swahili, Kingwana, Kikongo, Tshiluba 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  72% 
male: 
  84% 
female: 
  61% 
Labor force: 
  15 million (13% of the labor force is wage earners; 51% of the
  population is of working age)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 75%, industry 13%, services 12% (1985)

@Zaire, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Zaire 
conventional short form: 
  Zaire 
local long form: 
  Republique du Zaire 
local short form: 
  Zaire 
former: 
  Belgian Congo Congo/Leopoldville  Congo/Kinshasa 
Digraph: 
  CG
Type: 
  republic with a strong presidential system
Capital: 
  Kinshasa 
Administrative divisions: 
  10 regions (regions, singular - region) and 1 town* (ville); Bandundu,
  Bas-Zaire, Equateur, Haut-Zaire, Kasai-Occidental, Kasai-Oriental,
  Kinshasa*, Maniema, Nord-Kivu, Shaba, Sud-Kivu
Independence: 
  30 June 1960 (from Belgium)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Regime (Second Republic), 24 November (1965) 
Constitution: 
  24 June 1967, amended August 1974, revised 15 February 1978; amended
  April 1990; new transitional constitution promulgated in April 1994
Legal system: 
  based on Belgian civil law system and tribal law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Marshal MOBUTU Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga (since 24
  November 1965) election last held 29 July 1984 (next to be scheduled
  by High Council, the opposition-controlled transition legislature);
  results - President MOBUTU was reelected without opposition
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Etienne TSHISEKEDI (since NA 1993); note - de facto
  executive authority is exercised by President MOBUTU
cabinet: 
  National Executive Council; appointed by the president on
  recommendation of the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
parliament: 
  a single body consisting of the High Council of the Republic and the
  Parliament of the Transition with membership equally divided between
  presidential supporters and opponents
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  sole legal party until January 1991 - Popular Movement of the
  Revolution (MPR); other parties include Union for Democracy and Social
  Progress (UDPS), Etienne TSHISEKEDI wa Mulumba; Democratic Social
  Christian Party (PDSC), Joseph ILEO; Union of Federalists and
  Independent Republicans (UFERI), NGUZ a Karl-I-Bond; Unified Lumumbast
  Party (PALU), Antoine GIZENGA
Member of: 
  ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC, CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, GATT,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT,
  INTERPOL, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador TATANENE Manata 
chancery: 
  1800 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-7690 or 7691 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Deputy Chief of Mission John YATES 
embassy: 
  310 Avenue des Aviateurs, Kinshasa 
mailing address: 
  Unit 31550, Kinshasha; APO AE 09828 
telephone: 
  [243] (12) 21532, 21628 
FAX: 
  [243] (12) 21232 or 21534/5, ext. 2308 
consulate(s) general: 
  Lubumbashi (closed and evacuated in October 1991 because of the poor
  security situation)
Flag: 
  light green with a yellow disk in the center bearing a black arm
  holding a red flaming torch; the flames of the torch are blowing away
  from the hoist side; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

@Zaire, Economy

Overview: 
  Zaire's economy has continued to disintegrate. While meaningful
  economic figures are difficult to come by, Zaire's hyperinflation, the
  largest government deficit ever, and plunging mineral production have
  made the country one of the world's poorest. Most formal transactions
  are conducted in hard currency as indigenous banknotes have lost
  almost all value, and a barter economy now flourishes in all but the
  largest cities. Most individuals and families hang on grimly through
  subsistence farming and petty trade. The government has not been able
  to meet its financial obligations to the International Momentary Fund
  or put in place the financial measures advocated by the IMF. Although
  short-term prospects for improvement are dim, improved political
  stability would boost Zaire's long-term potential to effectively
  exploit its vast wealth of mineral and agricultural resources.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $21 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -6% (1992 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $500 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  35%-40% per month (1992 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  copper, coffee, diamonds, cobalt, crude oil
partners: 
  US, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, UK, Japan, South Africa
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  consumer goods, foodstuffs, mining and other machinery, transport
  equipment, fuels
partners: 
  South Africa, US, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK
External debt: 
  $9.2 billion (May 1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,580,000 kW
production: 
  6 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  160 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  mining, mineral processing, consumer products (including textiles,
  footwear, and cigarettes), processed foods and beverages, cement,
  diamonds
Agriculture: 
  cash crops - coffee, palm oil, rubber, quinine; food crops - cassava,
  bananas, root crops, corn
Illicit drugs: 
  illicit producer of cannabis, mostly for domestic consumption
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-89), $1.1 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $6.9
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $35 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $263 million 
note: 
  except for humanitarian aid to private organizations, no US assistance
  was given to Zaire in 1992
Currency: 
  1 zaire (Z) = 100 makuta
Exchange rates: 
  zaire (Z) per US$1 - 7,915,000 (September 1993), 1,990,000 (1992),
  15,587 (1991), 719 (1990), 381 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Zaire, Communications

Railroads: 
  5,254 km total; 3,968 km 1.067-meter gauge (851 km electrified); 125
  km 1.000-meter gauge; 136 km 0.615-meter gauge; 1,025 km 0.600-meter
  gauge; limited trackage in use because of civil strife
Highways: 
total: 
  146,500 km 
paved: 
  2,800 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, improved earth 46,200 km; unimproved earth 97,500 km 
Inland waterways: 
  15,000 km including the Congo, its tributaries, and unconnected lakes
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 390 km 
Ports: 
  Matadi, Boma, Banana
Merchant marine: 
  1 passenger cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 15,489 GRT/13,481
  DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  278 
usable: 
  233 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  25 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  72 
Telecommunications: 
  barely adequate wire and microwave service; broadcast stations - 10
  AM, 4 FM, 18 TV; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT,
  14 domestic

@Zaire, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary National Gendarmerie, Civil Guard,
  Special Presidential Division 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 9,178,659; fit for military service 4,674,819 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $49 million, 0.8% of GDP (1988)


@Zambia, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, between Zaire and Zimbabwe
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  752,610 sq km 
land area: 
  740,720 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,664 km, Angola 1,110 km, Malawi 837 km, Mozambique 419 km,
  Namibia 233 km, Tanzania 338 km, Zaire 1,930 km, Zimbabwe 797 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  quadripoint with Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe is in disagreement;
  Tanzania-Zaire-Zambia tripoint in Lake Tanganyika may no longer be
  indefinite since it is reported that the indefinite section of the
  Zaire-Zambia boundary has been settled
Climate: 
  tropical; modified by altitude; rainy season (October to April)
Terrain: 
  mostly high plateau with some hills and mountains
Natural resources: 
  copper, cobalt, zinc, lead, coal, emeralds, gold, silver, uranium,
  hydropower potential 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  47% 
forest and woodland: 
  27% 
other: 
  19% 
Irrigated land: 
  320 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  poaching seriously threatens rhinoceros and elephant populations;
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification
natural hazards: 
  NA 
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
Note: 
  landlocked

@Zambia, People

Population: 
  9,188,190 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.83% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  45.99 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  17.65 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  85 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  44.18 years 
male: 
  43.82 years 
female: 
  44.54 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.68 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Zambian(s) 
adjective: 
  Zambian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 98.7%, European 1.1%, other 0.2% 
Religions: 
  Christian 50-75%, Muslim and Hindu 24-49%, indigenous beliefs 1% 
Languages: 
  English (official)
note: 
  about 70 indigenous languages
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  73% 
male: 
  81% 
female: 
  65% 
Labor force: 
  2.455 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 85%, mining, manufacturing, and construction 6%, transport
  and services 9%

@Zambia, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Zambia 
conventional short form: 
  Zambia 
former: 
  Northern Rhodesia 
Digraph: 
  ZA
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Lusaka 
Administrative divisions: 
  9 provinces; Central, Copperbelt, Eastern, Luapula, Lusaka, Northern,
  North-Western, Southern, Western
Independence: 
  24 October 1964 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 24 October (1964) 
Constitution: 
  2 August 1991
Legal system: 
  based on English common law and customary law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in an ad hoc constitutional council; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  President Frederick CHILUBA (since 31 October 1991); Vice President
  Levy MWANAWASA (since 31 October 1991); election last held 31 October
  1991 (next to be held in 1996); results - Frederick CHILUBA 84%,
  Kenneth KAUNDA 16%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president from members of the National
  Assembly
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National Assembly: 
  elections last held 31 October 1991 (next to be held in 1996); results
  - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (150 total) MMD 125, UNIP 25;
  note - the MMD's majority was weakened by the defection of 13 of its
  parliamentary members during 1993 and the defeat of its candidates in
  4 of the resulting by-elections
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), Frederick CHILUBA; United
  National Independence Party (UNIP), Kebby MUSOKATWANE; National Party
  (NP), Inonge MBIKUSITA-LEWANIKA; 
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, FLS, G-19, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFTU, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM, ITU,
  LORCS, NAM, OAU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMOZ, UNOSOM, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Dunstan Weston KAMANA 
chancery: 
  2419 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-9717 through 9721 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Roland KUCHEL 
embassy: 
  corner of Independence Avenue and United Nations Avenue, Lusaka 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 31617, Lusaka 
telephone: 
  [260-1] 228-595, 228-601, 228-602, 228-603 
FAX: 
  [260-1] 261-538 
Flag: 
  green with a panel of three vertical bands of red (hoist side), black,
  and orange below a soaring orange eagle, on the outer edge of the flag

@Zambia, Economy

Overview: 
  The economy has been in decline for more than a decade with falling
  imports and growing foreign debt. Economic difficulties stem from a
  chronically depressed level of copper production and ineffective
  economic policies. In 1991 real GDP fell by 2% and in 1992 by 3% more.
  An annual population growth of 3% has brought a decline in per capita
  GDP of 50% over the past decade. A high inflation rate has also added
  to Zambia's economic woes in recent years.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $7.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  -2.8% (1992)
National product per capita: 
  $800 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  191% (1992)
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $665 million 
expenditures: 
  $767 million, including capital expenditures of $300 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $1 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  copper, zinc, cobalt, lead, tobacco
partners: 
  EC countries, Japan, South Africa, US, India
Imports: 
  $1.2 billion (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery, transportation equipment, foodstuffs, fuels, manufactures
partners: 
  EC countries, Japan, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, US
External debt: 
  $7.6 billion (1991)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -2% (1991); accounts for 40% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  2,775,000 kW
production: 
  12 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,400 kWh (1991)
Industries: 
  copper mining and processing, construction, foodstuffs, beverages,
  chemicals, textiles, and fertilizer
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 12% of GDP and 85% of labor force; crops - corn (food
  staple), sorghum, rice, peanuts, sunflower, tobacco, cotton,
  sugarcane, cassava; cattle, goats, beef, eggs
Illicit drugs: 
  role as regional transshipment center for mandrax and heroin
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (1970-89), $4.8 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $4.8
  billion; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $60 million; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $533 million 
Currency: 
  1 Zambian kwacha (ZK) = 100 ngwee
Exchange rates: 
  Zambian kwacha (ZK) per US$1 - 344.8276 (October 1993), 156.25 (1992),
  61.7284 (1991), 28.9855 (1990), 12.9032 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Zambia, Communications

Railroads: 
  1,266 km, all 1.067-meter gauge; 13 km double track
Highways: 
total: 
  36,370 km 
paved: 
  6,500 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel, stabilized earth 7,000 km; improved, unimproved
  earth 22,870 km 
Inland waterways: 
  2,250 km, including Zambezi and Luapula Rivers, Lake Tanganyika
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 1,724 km 
Ports: 
  Mpulungu (lake port)
Airports: 
total: 
  113 
usable: 
  103 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  13 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  1 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  4 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  22 
Telecommunications: 
  facilities are among the best in Sub-Saharan Africa; high-capacity
  microwave connects most larger towns and cities; broadcast stations -
  11 AM, 5 FM, 9 TV; satellite earth stations - 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT

@Zambia, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Air Force, Police 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 1,882,053; fit for military service 988,913 
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $45 million, 1% of GDP (1992 est.)


@Zimbabwe, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Africa, between South Africa and Zambia
Map references: 
  Africa, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  390,580 sq km 
land area: 
  386,670 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Montana
Land boundaries: 
  total 3,066 km, Botswana 813 km, Mozambique 1,231 km, South Africa 225
  km, Zambia 797 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  quadripoint with Botswana, Namibia, and Zambia is in disagreement
Climate: 
  tropical; moderated by altitude; rainy season (November to March)
Terrain: 
  mostly high plateau with higher central plateau (high veld); mountains
  in east
Natural resources: 
  coal, chromium ore, asbestos, gold, nickel, copper, iron ore,
  vanadium, lithium, tin, platinum group metals 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  7% 
permanent crops: 
  NA% (coffee is a permanent crop)
meadows and pastures: 
  12% 
forest and woodland: 
  62% 
other: 
  NA%
Irrigated land: 
  2,200 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation; soil erosion; land degradation; air and water pollution
natural hazards: 
  recurring droughts; floods and severe storms are rare
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea; signed,
  but not ratified - Biodiversity
Note: 
  landlocked

@Zimbabwe, People

Population: 
  10,975,078 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  1.2% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  37.24 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.1 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -7.18 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  7.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
tatal population: 
  42.06 years 
male: 
  40.44 years 
female: 
  43.74 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  5.1 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Zimbabwean(s) 
adjective: 
  Zimbabwean 
Ethnic divisions: 
  African 98% (Shona 71%, Ndebele 16%, other 11%), white 1%, mixed and
  Asian 1% 
Religions: 
  syncretic (part Christian, part indigenous beliefs) 50%, Christian
  25%, indigenous beliefs 24%, Muslim and other 1% 
Languages: 
  English (official), Shona, Sindebele 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.);
total population: 
  67% 
male: 
  74% 
female: 
  60% 
Labor force: 
  3.1 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture 74%, transport and services 16%, mining, manufacturing,
  construction 10% (1987)

@Zimbabwe, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Zimbabwe 
conventional short form: 
  Zimbabwe 
former: 
  Southern Rhodesia 
Digraph: 
  ZI
Type: 
  parliamentary democracy 
Capital: 
  Harare 
Administrative divisions: 
  8 provinces; Manicaland, Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland East,
  Mashonaland West, Masvingo (Victoria), Matabeleland North,
  Matabeleland South, Midlands
Independence: 
  18 April 1980 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Independence Day, 18 April (1980) 
Constitution: 
  21 December 1979
Legal system: 
  mixture of Roman-Dutch and English common law
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state and head of government: 
  Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE (since 31 December 1987);
  Co-Vice President Simon Vengai MUZENDA (since 31 December 1987);
  Co-Vice President Joshua M. NKOMO (since 6 August 1990); election last
  held 28-30 March 1990 (next to be held NA March 1996); results -
  Robert MUGABE 78.3%, Edgar TEKERE 21.7%
cabinet: 
  Cabinet; appointed by the president; responsible to Parliament
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
Parliament: 
  elections last held 28-30 March 1990 (next to be held NA March 1995);
  results - percent of vote by party NA; seats - (150 total, 120
  elected) ZANU-PF 117, ZUM 2, ZANU-S 1
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), Robert
  MUGABE; Zimbabwe African National Union-Sithole (ZANU-S), Ndabaningi
  SITHOLE; Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM), Edgar TEKERE and Abel
  MUYOREWA; Democratic Party (DP), Emmanuel MAGOCHE; Forum Party, Enock
  DUMBUTSHENA
Member of: 
  ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, FLS, G-15, G-77, GATT, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAU, PCA, SADC, UN, UNAVEM II,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMUR, UNOSOM, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Amos Bernard Muvengwa MIDZI 
chancery: 
  1608 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009 
telephone: 
  (202) 332-7100 
FAX: 
  (202) 483-9326 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Edward Gibson LANPHER 
embassy: 
  172 Herbert Chitepo Avenue, Harare 
mailing address: 
  P. O. Box 3340, Harare 
telephone: 
  [263] (4) 794-521 
FAX: 
  [263] (4) 796-488 
Flag: 
  seven equal horizontal bands of green, yellow, red, black, red,
  yellow, and green with a white equilateral triangle edged in black
  based on the hoist side; a yellow Zimbabwe bird is superimposed on a
  red five-pointed star in the center of the triangle

@Zimbabwe, Economy

Overview: 
  Agriculture employs three-fourths of the labor force and supplies
  almost 40% of exports. The manufacturing sector, based on agriculture
  and mining, produces a variety of goods and contributes 35% to GDP.
  Mining accounts for only 5% of both GDP and employment, but supplies
  of minerals and metals account for about 40% of exports. Wide
  fluctuations in agricultural production over the past six years have
  resulted in an uneven growth rate, one that on average has matched the
  3% annual increase in population. Helped by an IMF/World Bank
  structural adjustment program, output rose 3.5% in 1991. A severe
  drought in 1991/92 caused the economy to contract by about 10% in
  1992.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $15.9 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  2% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $1,400 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  22% (January 1994 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  at least 35% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.7 billion 
expenditures: 
  $2.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $253 million (FY93)
Exports: 
  $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  agricultural 35% (tobacco 30%, other 10%), manufactures 25%, gold 12%,
  ferrochrome 10%, textiles 8% (1992)
partners: 
  UK 14%, Germany 11%, South Africa 10%, Japan 7%, US 5% (1991)
Imports: 
  $1.8 billion (c.i.f., 1992 est.)
commodities: 
  machinery and transportation equipment 41%, other manufactures 23%,
  chemicals 16%, fuels 12% (1991)
partners: 
  South Africa 25%, UK 15%, Germany 9%, US 6%, Japan 5% (1991)
External debt: 
  $3.5 billion (December 1992 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.3% (1992); accounts for 35% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  3,650,000 kW
production: 
  8.18 billion kWh (1992)
consumption per capita: 
  740 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  mining, steel, clothing and footwear, chemicals, foodstuffs,
  fertilizer, beverage, transportation equipment, wood products
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 20% of GDP and employs 74% of population; 40% of land
  area divided into 4,500 large commercial farms and 42% in communal
  lands; crops - corn (food staple), cotton, tobacco, wheat, coffee,
  sugarcane, peanuts; livestock - cattle, sheep, goats, pigs;
  self-sufficient in food
Economic aid: 
  NA
Currency: 
  1 Zimbabwean dollar (Z$) = 100 cents
Exchange rates: 
  Zimbabwean dollars (Z$) per US$1 - 8.1037 (January 1994), 6.4725
  (1993), 5.1046 (1992), 3.4282 (1991), 2.4480 (1990), 2.1133 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  1 July - 30 June

@Zimbabwe, Communications

Railroads: 
  2,745 km 1.067-meter gauge (including 42 km double track, 355 km
  electrified)
Highways: 
total: 
  85,237 km 
paved: 
  15,800 km 
unpaved: 
  crushed stone, gravel, stabilized earth 39,090 km; improved earth
  23,097 km; unimproved earth 7,250 km 
Inland waterways: 
  Lake Kariba is a potential line of communication
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products 212 km 
Airports: 
total: 
  477 
usable: 
  401 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  22 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  3 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  28 
Telecommunications: 
  system was once one of the best in Africa, but now suffers from poor
  maintenance; consists of microwave links, open-wire lines, and radio
  communications stations; 247,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 8
  AM, 18 FM, 8 TV; 1 Atlantic Ocean INTELSAT earth station

@Zimbabwe, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Zimbabwe National Army, Air Force of Zimbabwe, Zimbabwe Republic
  Police (including Police Support Unit, Paramilitary Police)
Manpower availability: 
  males 15-49 2,371,186; fit for military service 1,472,603 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $412.4 million, about 6% of GDP (FY91 est.)


Appendix A:  The United Nations System 
 
The UN is composed of six principal organs and numerous subordinate 
agencies and bodies as follows: 
 
1) Secretariat 
 
2) General Assembly: 
 
   Habitat Commission on Human Settlements 
   UNCTAD  United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
   UNDP    United Nations Development Program 
   UNEP    United Nations Environment Program 
   UNFPA   United Nations Population Fund 
   UNHCR   United Nations Office of High Commissioner for Refugees 
   UNICEF  United Nations Children's Fund 
   UNITAR  UN Institute for Training and Research 
   UNRWA   United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees 
           in the Near East 
   UN Special Fund 
   UN University 
   WFC     World Food Council 
   WFP     World Food Program 
 
3) Security Council: 
 
   Peacekeeping Forces and Organizations 
      UNAVEM II  United Nations Angola Verification Mission  
      UNDOF      United Nations Disengagement Observer Force 
      UNFICYP    United Nations Force in Cyprus 
      UNIFIL     United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 
      UNMOGIP    United Nations Military Observer Group in India and 
                 Pakistan 
      UNTSO      United Nations Truce Supervision Organization 
      UNIKOM     United Nations Iran-Kuwait Observation Mission 
      MINURSO    United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western 
                 Sahara 
      ONUSAL     United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador 
      UNTAC      United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia 
      UNPROFOR   United Nations Protection Force 
      UNOSOM II  United Nations Operation in Somalia 
      UNOMIG     United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia 
      UNOMOZ     United Nations Operation in Mozambique 
      UNOMUR     United Nations Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda 
 
   Commissions Established Pursuant to SC Res.687 
      UNSCOM     UN Special Commission 
      United National Compensation Commission 
      UN Iraq/Kuwait Boundary Demarcation Commission 
 
4) Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC): 
 
   Specialized agencies 
      FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
      IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
      ICAO      International Civil Aviation Organization 
      IDA       International Development Association 
      IFAD      International Fund for Agricultural Development 
      IFC       International Finance Corporation 
      ILO       International Labor Organization 
      IMF       International Monetary Fund 
      IMO       International Maritime Organization 
      ITU       International Telecommunication Union 
      UNESCO    United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 
                Organization 
      UNIDO     United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
      UPU       Universal Postal Union 
      WHO       World Health Organization 
      WIPO      World Intellectual Property Organization 
      WMO       World Meteorological Organization 
 
   Related organizations 
      GATT      General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
      IAEA      International Atomic Energy Agency 
 
   Regional commissions 
      ECA       Economic Commission for Africa 
      ECE       Economic Commission for Europe 
      ECLAC     Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
      ESCAP     Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
      ESCWA     Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia 
 
   Functional commissions 
      Commission on Human Rights 
      Commission on Narcotics Drugs 
      Commission for Social Development 
      Commission on the Status of Women 
      Population Commission 
      Statistical Commission 
      Commission on Science and Technology for Development 
      Commission on Sustainable Development 
      Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 
      Commission on Transnational Corporations 
 
5) Trusteeship Council 
 
6) International Court of Justice (ICJ) 


Appendix B:  Abbreviations for International Organizations and Groups 
 
A     ABEDA    Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa 
      ACC      Arab Cooperation Council 
      ACCT     Agence de Cooperation Culturelle et Technique; see Agency 
                    for Cultural and Technical Cooperation 
      ACP      African, Caribbean, and Pacific Countries 
      AfDB     African Development Bank 
      AFESD    Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
      AG       Andean Group 
      AL       Arab League 
      ALADI    Asociacion Latinoamericana de Integracion; see Latin 
                    American Integration Association (LAIA) 
      AMF      Arab Monetary Fund 
      AMU      Arab Maghreb Union 
      ANZUS    Australia-New Zealand-United States Security Treaty 
      APEC     Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
      AsDB     Asian Development Bank 
      ASEAN    Association of Southeast Asian Nations 

B     BAD      Banque Africaine de Developpement; see African Development 
                    Bank (AfDB) 
      BADEA    Banque Arabe de Developpement Economique en Afrique; see 
                    Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (ABEDA) 
      BCIE     Banco Centroamericano de Integracion Economico; see Central 
                    American Bank for Economic Integration (BCIE) 
      BDEAC    Banque de Developpment des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale; see 
                    Central African States Development Bank (BDEAC) 
      Benelux  Benelux Economic Union 
      BID      Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo; see Inter-American 
                    Development Bank (IADB) 
      BIS      Bank for International Settlements 
      BOAD     Banque Ouest-Africaine de Developpement; see West African 
                    Development Bank (WADB) 
      BSEC     Black Sea Economic Cooperation Zone 

C     C        Commonwealth 
      CACM     Central American Common Market 
      CAEU     Council of Arab Economic Unity 
      CARICOM  Caribbean Community and Common Market 
      CBSS     Council of the Baltic Sea States 
      CCC      Customs Cooperation Council 
      CDB      Caribbean Development Bank 
      CE       Council of Europe 
      CEAO     Communaute Economique de l'Afrique de l'Ouest; see West 
                    African Economic Community (CEAO) 
      CEEAC    Communaute Economique des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale; see 
                    Economic Community of Central African States (CEEAC) 
      CEI      Central European Initiative 
      CEMA     Council for Mutual Economic Assistance; also known as CMEA 
                    or Comecon; abolished 1 January 1991 
      CEPGL    Communaute Economique des Pays des Grands Lacs; see Economic 
                    Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL) 
       CERN     Conseil Europeen pour la Recherche Nucleaire; see European 
                    Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) 
      CG        Contadora Group 
      CIS       Commonwealth of Independent States 
      CMEA      Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA); also known 
                     as Comecon; abolished 1 January 1991 
      COCOM     Coordinating Committee on Export Controls 
      Comecon   Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA); also known 
                     as CMEA; abolished 1 January 1991 
      CP        Colombo Plan 
      CSCE      Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe 

D     DC        developed country 

E     EADB      East African Development Bank 
      EBRD      European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
      EC        European Community; see European Union (EU) 
      ECA       Economic Commission for Africa 
      ECAFE     Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East; see Economic 
                     and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) 
      ECE       Economic Commission for Europe 
      ECLA      Economic Commission for Latin America; see Economic 
                     Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) 
      ECLAC     Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
      ECO       Economic Cooperation Organization 
      ECOSOC    Economic and Social Council 
      ECOWAS    Economic Community of West African States 
      ECSC      European Coal and Steel Community 
      ECWA      Economic Commission for Western Asia; see Economic and 
                     Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) 
      EEC       European Economic Community 
      EFTA      European Free Trade Association 
      EIB       European Investment Bank 
      Entente   Council of the Entente 
      ESA       European Space Agency 
      ESCAP     Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
      ESCWA     Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia 
      EU        European Union 
      Euratom   European Atomic Energy Community 

F     FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization 
      FLS       Front Line States 
      FZ        Franc Zone 

G     G-2       Group of 2 
      G-3       Group of 3 
      G-5       Group of 5 
      G-6       Group of 6 (not to be confused with the Big Six) 
      G-7       Group of 7 
      G-8       Group of 8 
      G-9       Group of 9 
      G-10      Group of 10 
      G-11      Group of 11 
      G-15      Group of 15 
      G-19      Group of 19 
      G-24      Group of 24 
      G-30      Group of 30 
      G-33      Group of 33 
      G-77      Group of 77 
      GATT      General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
      GCC       Gulf Cooperation Council 

H     Habitat   Commission on Human Settlements 

I     IADB      Inter-American Development Bank 
      IAEA      International Atomic Energy Agency 
      IBEC      International Bank for Economic Cooperation 
      IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
      ICAO      International Civil Aviation Organization 
      ICC       International Chamber of Commerce 
      ICEM      Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration; see 
                     International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
      ICFTU     International Confederation of Free Trade Unions 
      ICJ       International Court of Justice 
      ICM       Intergovernmental Committee for Migration; see 
                     International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
      ICRC      International Committee of the Red Cross 
      IDA       International Development Association 
      IDB       Islamic Development Bank 
      IEA       International Energy Agency 
      IFAD      International Fund for Agricultural Development 
      IFC       International Finance Corporation 
      IFCTU     International Federation of Christian Trade Unions 
      IGADD     Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development  
      IIB       International Investment Bank  
      ILO       International Labor Organization 
      IMCO      Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization; see 
                     International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
      IMF       International Monetary Fund 
      IMO       International Maritime Organization 
      INMARSAT  International Maritime Satellite Organization 
      INTELSAT  International Telecommunications Satellite Organization 
      INTERPOL  International Criminal Police Organization 
      IOC       International Olympic Committee 
      IOM       International Organization for Migration 
      ISO       International Organization for Standardization 
      ITU       International Telecommunication Union 

L     LAES      Latin American Economic System 
      LAIA      Latin American Integration Association 
      LAS       League of Arab States; see Arab League (AL) 
      LDC       less developed country 
      LLDC      least developed country 
      LORCS     League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 

M     MERCOSUR  Mercado Comun del Cono Sur; see Southern Cone Common Market 
      MINURSO   United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara 
      MTCR      Missile Technology Control Regime 

N     NACC      North Atlantic Cooperation Council 
      NAM       Nonaligned Movement 
      NATO      North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
      NC        Nordic Council 
      NEA       Nuclear Energy Agency 
      NIB       Nordic Investment Bank 
      NIC       newly industrializing country; see newly industrializing 
                     economy (NIE) 
      NIE       newly industrializing economy 
      NSG       Nuclear Suppliers Group 

O     OAPEC     Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries 
      OAS       Organization of American States 
      OAU       Organization of African Unity 
      OECD      Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
      OECS      Organization of Eastern Caribbean States 
      OIC       Organization of the Islamic Conference 
      ONUSAL    United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador 
      OPANAL    Organismo para la Proscripcion de las Armas Nucleares en la 
                     America Latina y el Caribe; see Agency for the 
                     Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 
                     the Caribbean 
      OPEC      Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 

P     PCA       Permanent Court of Arbitration 

R     RG        Rio Group 

S     SAARC     South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
      SACU      Southern African Customs Union 
      SADC      Southern African Development Community 
      SADCC     Southern African Development Coordination Conference 
      SELA      Sistema Economico Latinoamericana; see Latin American 
                     Economic System (LAES) 
      SPARTECA  South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Cooperation 
                     Agreement 
      SPC       South Pacific Commission 
      SPF       South Pacific Forum 

U     UDEAC     Union Douaniere et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale; see 
                     Central African Customs and Economic Union (UDEAC) 
      UN        United Nations 
      UNAVEM II United Nations Angola Verification Mission 
      UNCTAD    United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
      UNDOF     United Nations Disengagement Observer Force 
      UNDP      United Nations Development Program 
      UNEP      United Nations Environment Program 
      UNESCO    United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 
                     Organization 
      UNFICYP   United Nations Force in Cyprus 
      UNFPA     United Nations Fund for Population Activities; see UN 
                     Population Fund (UNFPA) 
      UNHCR     United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees 
      UNICEF    United Nations Children's Fund 
      UNIDO     United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
      UNIFIL    United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 
      UNIKOM    United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission 
      UNMOGIP   United Nations Military Observer Group in India and 
                     Pakistan 
      UNOMIG    United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia  
      UNOMOZ    United Nations Operation in Mozambique 
      UNOMUR    United Nations Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda 
      UNOSOM    United Nations Operation in Somalia 
      UNPROFOR  United Nations Protection Force 
      UNRWA     United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine 
                     Refugees in the Near East 
      UNTAC     United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia 
      UNTSO     United Nations Truce Supervision Organization 
      UPU       Universal Postal Union 
      USSR/EE   USSR/Eastern Europe 

W     WADB      West African Development Bank 
      WCL       World Confederation of Labor 
      WEU       Western European Union 
      WFC       World Food Council 
      WFP       World Food Program 
      WFTU      World Federation of Trade Unions 
      WHO       World Health Organization 
      WIPO      World Intellectual Property Organization 
      WMO       World Meteorological Organization 
      WP        Warsaw Pact (members met 1 July 1991 to dissolve the 
                     alliance) 
      WTO       World Tourism Organization 

Z     ZC        Zangger Committee 
 
Note: Not all international organizations and groups have abbreviations


Appendix C:  International Organizations and Groups 

----- 

Note: The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has dissolved, 
and ceases to exist. None of the successor states of the former Yugoslavia, 
including Serbia and Montenegro, have been permitted to participate solely 
on the basis of the membership of the former Yugoslavia in the United 
Nations General Assembly and Economic and Social Council and their 
subsidiary bodies and in various United Nations Specialized Agencies. The 
United Nations, however, permits the seat and nameplate of the SFRY to 
remain, permits the SFRY mission to continue to function, and continues to 
fly the flag of the former Yugoslavia. For a variety of reasons, a number 
of other organizations have not yet taken action with regard to the 
membership of the former Yugoslavia. The World Factbook therefore continues 
to list Yugoslavia under international organizations where the SFRY seat 
remains or where no action has yet been taken.  

----- 

advanced developing countries 
 
another term for those less developed countries (LDCs) with particularly 
rapid industrial development; see newly industrializing economies (NIEs) 

-----  

African, Caribbean, and Pacific Countries (ACP) 
 
established - 1 April 1976 
 
aim - members have a preferential economic and aid relationship with the EU 
 
members - (70) Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Benin, Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African 
Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, 
Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, 
Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, 
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao 
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, 
Somalia, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

African Development Bank (AfDB),  
also known as Banque Africaine de Developpement (BAD) 
 
established - 4 August 1963 
 
aim - to promote economic and social development 
 
regional members - (53) Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, 
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, Sao Tome 
and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, 
Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe  
 
nonregional members - (26) Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, 
Kuwait, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US, Yugoslavia  

----- 

Agence de Cooperation Culturelle et Technique (ACCT) 
 
see Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation (ACCT) 

----- 

Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation (ACCT) 
 
note - acronym from Agence de Cooperation Culturelle et Technique 
 
established - 21 March 1970 
 
aim - to promote cultural and technical cooperation among French-speaking 
countries 
 
members - (34) Belgium, Benin, Burkina, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central 
African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, 
Equatorial Guinea, France, Gabon, Guinea, Haiti, Laos, Lebanon, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Mali, Mauritius, Monaco, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, 
Togo, Tunisia, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Zaire 
 
associate members - (5) Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, Morocco, Saint 
Lucia 
 
participating governments - (2) New Brunswick (Canada), Quebec (Canada)  
 
observers - (3) Bulgaria, Cambodia, Romania 

----- 

Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (OPANAL) 
 
note - acronym from Organismo para la Proscripcion de las Armas Nucleares 
en la America Latina y el Caribe (OPANAL) 
 
established - 14 February 1967 
 
aim - to encourage the peaceful uses of atomic energy and prohibit nuclear 
weapons 
 
members - (26) Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, 
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, 
Paraguay, Peru, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela  

----- 

Andean Group (AG) 
 
established - 26 May 1969  
 
effective - 16 October 1969 
 
aim - to promote harmonious development through economic integration 
 
members - (5) Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela 
 
associate member - (1) Panama 
 
observers - (26) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, India, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, Paraguay, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US, 
Uruguay, Yugoslavia 

----- 

Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (ABEDA) 
 
note - also known as Banque Arabe de Developpement Economique en Afrique 
(BADEA)  
 
established - 18 February 1974 
 
effective - 16 September 1974 
 
aim - to promote economic development 
 
members - (17 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Algeria, Bahrain, 
Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE, Palestine Liberation 
Organization; note - these are all the members of the Arab League except 
Djibouti, Somalia, and Yemen 

----- 

Arab Cooperation Council (ACC) 
 
established - 16 February 1989 
 
aim - to promote economic cooperation and integration, possibly leading to 
an Arab Common Market 
 
members - (4) Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Yemen 

----- 

Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD) 
 
established - 16 May 1968 
 
aim - to promote economic and social development 
 
members - (20 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Algeria, Bahrain, 
Djibouti, Egypt (suspended from 1979 to 1988), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, 
Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE, Yemen, Palestine Liberation Organization 

----- 

Arab League (AL) 
 
note - also known as League of Arab States (LAS) 
 
established - 22 March 1945 
 
aim - to promote economic, social, political, and military cooperation 
 
members - (20 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Algeria, Bahrain, 
Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, 
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE, Yemen, 
Palestine Liberation Organization 

----- 

Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) 
 
established - 17 February 1989 
 
aim - to promote cooperation and integration among the Arab states of 
northern Africa 
 
members - (5) Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Tunisia 

----- 

Arab Monetary Fund (AMF) 
 
established - 27 April 1976 
 
effective - 2 February 1977 
 
aim - to promote Arab cooperation, development, and integration in monetary 
and economic affairs 
 
members - (19 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Algeria, Bahrain, 
Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE, Yemen, Palestine 
Liberation Organization 

----- 

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) 
 
established - 7 November 1989 
 
aim - to promote trade and investment in the Pacific basin 
 
members - (16) all ASEAN members (Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, 
Singapore, Thailand) plus Australia, Canada, China, Hong Kong, Japan, South 
Korea, NZ, Papua New Guinea, Taiwan, US 

----- 

Asian Development Bank (AsDB) 
 
established - 19 December 1966 
 
aim - to promote regional economic cooperation 
 
regional members - (37) Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, 
Cambodia, China, Cook Islands, Fiji, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, 
Kiribati, South Korea, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, Marshall Islands, 
Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal, NZ, Pakistan, Papua 
New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, 
Thailand, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Western Samoa  
 
nonregional members - (16) Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Turkey, UK, US 

----- 

Asociacion Latinoamericana de Integracion (ALADI) 
 
see Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) 

----- 

Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
 
established - 9 August 1967 
 
aim - to encourage regional economic, social, and cultural cooperation 
among the non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia 
 
members - (6) Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand 
 
observers - (3) Laos, Papua New Guinea, Vietnam 

----- 

Australia Group 
 
established - 1984 
 
aim - to consult on and coordinate export controls related to chemical and 
biological weapons 
 
members - (25) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
UK, US 
 
observer - (1) Singapore 

----- 

Australia--New Zealand--United States Security Treaty (ANZUS)  
 
established - 1 September 1951 
 
effective - 29 April 1952 
 
aim - to implement a trilateral mutual security agreement, although the US 
suspended security obligations to NZ on 11 August 1986 
 
members - (3) Australia, NZ, US 

----- 

Banco Centroamericano de Integracion Economico (BCIE) 
 
see Central American Bank for Economic Integration (BCIE) 

----- 

Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo (BID) 
 
see Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) 

----- 

Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
 
established - 20 January 1930 
 
effective - 17 March 1930 
 
aim - to promote cooperation among central banks in international financial 
settlements 
 
members - (33) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, 
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US, Yugoslavia  

----- 

Banque Africaine de Developpement (BAD) 
 
see African Development Bank (AfDB) 

----- 

Banque Arabe de Developpement Economique en Afrique (BADEA) 
 
see Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (ABEDA) 

----- 

Banque de Developpement des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale (BDEAC)  
 
see Central African States Development Bank (BDEAC) 

----- 

Banque Ouest-Africaine de  Developpement (BOAD) 
 
see West African Development Bank (WADB) 

----- 

Benelux Economic Union (Benelux) 
 
note - acronym from Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg 
 
established - 3 February 1958  
 
effective - 1 November 1960 
 
aim - to develop closer economic cooperation and integration 
 
members - (3) Belgium, Luxembourg, Netherlands 

----- 

Big Seven 
 
note - membership is the same as the Group of 7 
 
established - NA 1975 
 
aim - to discuss and coordinate major economic policies 
 
members - (7) Big Six (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK) plus the 
US 

----- 

Big Six 
 
note - not to be confused with the Group of 6 
 
established - NA 1967 
 
aim - to foster economic cooperation 
 
members - (6) Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK 

----- 

Black Sea Economic Cooperation Zone (BSEC) 
 
established - 25 June 1992 
 
aim - to enhance regional stability through economic cooperation 
 
members - (11) Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Georgia, Greece, 
Moldova, Romania, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine  
 
observer - (1) Poland 

----- 

Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) 
 
established - 4 July 1973 
 
effective - 1 August 1973 
 
aim - to promote economic integration and development, especially among the 
less developed countries 
 
members - (13) Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, 
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago 
 
associate members - (2) British Virgin Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands 
 
observers - (10) Anguilla, Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Dominican Republic, 
Haiti, Mexico, Netherlands Antilles, Puerto Rico, Suriname, Venezuela 

----- 

Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) 
 
established - 18 October 1969 
 
effective - 26 January 1970 
 
aim - to promote economic development and cooperation 
 
regional members - (20) Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, 
Barbados, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Colombia, 
Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Mexico, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Turks and Caicos Islands, Venezuela 
 
nonregional members - (5) Canada, France, Germany, Italy, UK 

----- 

Cartagena Group 
 
see Group of 11 

----- 

Central African Customs and Economic Union (UDEAC) 
 
note - acronym from Union Douaniere et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale 
 
established - 8 December 1964 
 
effective - 1 January 1966 
 
aim - to promote the establishment of a Central African Common Market 
 
members - (6) Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Equatorial 
Guinea, Gabon  

----- 

Central African States Development Bank (BDEAC) 
 
note - acronym from Banque de Developpement des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale  
 
established - 3 December 1975 
 
aim - to provide loans for economic development 
 
members - (9) Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Equatorial 
Guinea, France, Gabon, Germany, Kuwait 

----- 

Central American Bank for Economic Integration (BCIE) 
 
note - acronym from Banco Centroamericano de Integracion Economico 
 
established - 13 December 1960 
 
aim - to promote economic integration and development 
 
members - (5) Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua 
 
nonregional members - (4) Argentina, Mexico, Taiwan, Venezuela 

----- 

Central American Common Market (CACM) 
 
established - 13 December 1960 
 
effective - 3 June 1961 
 
aim - to promote establishment of a Central American Common Market 
 
members - (5) Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua 

----- 

Central European Initiative (CEI) 
 
note - evolved from the Hexagonal Group 
 
established - 27 July 1991 
 
aim - to form an economic and political cooperation group for the region 
between the Adriatic and the Baltic Seas 
 
members - (10) Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Czech Republic, 
Hungary, Italy, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Yugoslavia 
 
participating nonmembers - (6) Baden-Wurtemburg, Bavaria, Belarus, 
Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine 

----- 

centrally planned economies  
 
a term applied mainly to the traditionally Communist states that looked to 
the former USSR for leadership; most are now evolving toward more 
democratic and market-oriented systems; also known formerly as the Second 
World or as the Communist countries; through the 1980s, this group included 
Albania, Bulgaria, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, GDR, Hungary, 
North Korea, Laos, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, USSR, Vietnam, Yugoslavia 

----- 

Colombo Plan (CP) 
 
established - 1 July 1951 
 
aim - to promote economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific  
 
members - (24) Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, Cambodia, 
Fiji, India, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, South Korea, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, 
Nepal, NZ, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, 
Sri Lanka, Thailand, US 

----- 

Commission for Social Development 
 
established - 21 June 1946 as the Social Commission, renamed 29 July 1966  
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization dealing with social 
development programs of UN 
 
members - (32) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 

----- 

Commission on Human Rights 
 
established - 18 February 1946 
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization dealing with human rights 
programs of UN 
 
members - (53) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 

----- 

Commission on Human Settlements (Habitat) 
 
established - 12 October 1978 
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization assisting in solving human 
settlement problems of UN 
 
members - (58) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 

----- 

Commission on Narcotic Drugs 
 
established - 16 February 1946 
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization dealing with illicit drugs 
programs of UN 
 
members - (53) selected on a rotating basis from all regions with emphasis 
on producing and processing countries 

----- 

Commission on the Status of Women 
 
established - 21 June 1946 
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization dealing with women's rights 
goals of UN 
 
members - (32) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 

----- 

Commonwealth (C) 
 
established - 31 December 1931 
 
aim - voluntary association that evolved from the British Empire and that 
seeks to foster multinational cooperation and assistance 
 
members - (48) Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, 
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei, Canada, Cyprus, Dominica, The Gambia, 
Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, India, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho, Malawi, 
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Namibia, NZ, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua 
New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri 
Lanka, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, UK, 
Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia, Zimbabwe  
 
special members - (2) Nauru, Tuvalu 

----- 

Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) 
 
established - 8 December 1991 
 
effective - 21 December 1991 
 
aim - to coordinate intercommonwealth relations and to provide a mechanism 
for the orderly dissolution of the USSR 
 
members - (12) Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan  

----- 

Communaute Economique de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (CEAO) 
 
see West African Economic Community (CEAO) 

----- 

Communaute Economique des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale (CEEAC) 
 
see Economic Community of Central African States (CEEAC) 

----- 

Communaute Economique des Pays des Grands Lacs (CEPGL) 
 
see Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL) 

----- 

Communist countries 
 
traditionally the Marxist-Leninist states with authoritarian governments 
and command economies based on the Soviet model; most of the successor 
states are no longer Communist; see centrally planned economies 

----- 

Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) 
 
established - 3 July 1973 
 
aim - discusses issues of mutual concern and reviews implementation of the 
Helsinki Agreement 
 
members - (53) Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Holy See, 
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, 
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Monaco, Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, UK, 
US, Uzbekistan, Yugoslavia (suspended) 
 
observer - (1) The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 

----- 

Conseil Europeen pour la Recherche Nucleaire (CERN) 
 
see European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) 

----- 

Contadora Group (CG) 
 
was established 5 January 1983 (on the Panamanian island of Contadora) to 
reduce tensions and conflicts in Central America but evolved into the Rio 
Group (RG); members included Colombia, Mexico, Panama, Venezuela  

----- 

Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf 
 
see Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 

----- 

Coordinating Committee on Export Controls (COCOM) 
 
note - was abolished 31 March 1994; COCOM members are working on a new 
organization with expanded membership which focuses on nonproliferation 
export controls as opposed to East-West controls of advanced technology 
 
established - NA 1949 
 
aim - to control the export of strategic products and technical data from 
member countries to proscribed destinations 
 
members - (17) Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, 
Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, 
Turkey, UK, US 
  
cooperating countries - (14) Austria, Czech Republic, Finland, Hong Kong, 
Hungary, Ireland, South Korea, NZ, Poland, Singapore, Slovakia, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Taiwan 

----- 

Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA) 
also known as CMEA or Comecon, 
 
was established 25 January 1949 to promote the development of socialist 
economies and was abolished 1 January 1991; members included Afghanistan 
(observer), Albania (had not participated since 1961 break with USSR), 
Angola (observer), Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia (observer), 
GDR, Hungary, Laos (observer), Mongolia, Mozambique (observer), Nicaragua 
(observer), Poland, Romania, USSR, Vietnam, Yemen (observer), Yugoslavia 
(associate)  

----- 

Council of Arab Economic Unity (CAEU) 
 
established - 3 June 1957 
 
effective - 30 May 1964 
 
aim - to promote economic integration among Arab nations 
 
members - (11 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Egypt, Iraq, 
Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, Mauritania, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, UAE, Yemen, 
Palestine Liberation Organization  

----- 

Council of Europe (CE) 
 
established - 5 May 1949 
 
effective - 3 August 1949 
 
aim - to promote increased unity and quality of life in Europe 
 
members - (32) Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, 
Italy, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Turkey, UK 
 
guests - (8) Albania, Belarus, Croatia, Latvia, Moldova, Russia, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine 
 
observers - (2) Holy See, Israel 

----- 

Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) 
 
established - 5 March 1992 
 
aim - to promote cooperation among the Baltic Sea states in the areas of 
aid to new democratic institutions, economic development, humanitarian aid, 
energy and the environment, cultural programs and education, and 
transportation and communication 
 
members - (10) Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden 
 
observers - (2) Belarus, Ukraine 

----- 

Council of the Entente (Entente) 
 
established - 29 May 1959 
 
aim - to promote economic, social, and political coordination 
 
members - (5) Benin, Burkina, Cote d'Ivoire, Niger, Togo 

-----  

Customs Cooperation Council (CCC) 
 
established - 15 December 1950 
 
aim - to promote international cooperation in customs matters 
 
members - (126) Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, 
Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bermuda, Botswana, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, 
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, 
The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hong 
Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, South Korea, Latvia, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Niger, Nigeria, 
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, 
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, 
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

developed countries (DCs) 
 
the top group in the comprehensive but mutually exclusive hierarchy of 
developed countries (DCs), former USSR/Eastern Europe (former USSR/EE), and 
less developed countries (LDCs); includes the market-oriented economies of 
the mainly democratic nations in the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD), Bermuda, Israel, South Africa, and the European 
ministates; also known as the First World, high-income countries, the 
North, industrial countries; generally have a per capita GNP/GDP in excess 
of $10,000 although four OECD countries and South Africa have figures well 
under $10,000 and two of the excluded OPEC countries have figures of more 
than $10,000; the 35 DCs are: Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Bermuda, Canada, Denmark, Faroe Islands, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Holy See, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Portugal, San 
Marino, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US  

----- 

developing countries 
 
an imprecise term for the less developed countries with growing economies; 
see less developed countries (LDCs) 

----- 

East African Development Bank (EADB) 
 
established - 6 June 1967 
 
effective - 1 December 1967 
 
aim - to promote economic development 
 
members - (3) Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda 

----- 

Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) 
 
established - 28 March 1947 as Economic Commission for Asia and the Far 
East (ECAFE)  
 
aim - to carryout the commitment of the Economic and Social Council of the 
UN to promote economic development 
 
members - (48) Afghanistan, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Brunei, Burma, Cambodia, China, Fiji, France, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, North Korea, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, 
Malaysia, Maldives, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, 
Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, 
Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, 
Thailand, Tonga, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, UK, US, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Vietnam, Western Samoa 
 
associate members - (10) American Samoa, Cook Islands, French Polynesia, 
Guam, Hong Kong, Macau, New Caledonia, Niue, Northern Mariana Islands, 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau) 

----- 

Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) 
 
established - 9 August 1973 as Economic Commission for Western Asia (ECWA) 
 
aim - to promote economic development as a regional commission for the UN's 
Economic and Social Council 
 
members - (12 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Bahrain, Egypt, 
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, UAE, 
Yemen, Palestine Liberation Organization 

----- 

Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - to coordinate the economic and social work of the UN; includes five 
regional commissions (see Economic Commission for Africa, Economic 
Commission for Europe, Economic Commission for Latin America and the 
Caribbean, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, 
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia) and six functional 
commissions (see Commission for Social Development, Commission on Human 
Rights, Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Commission on the Status of Women, 
Population Commission, Statistical Commission, Commission on Science and 
Technology for Development, Commission on Sustainable Development, 
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and Commission on 
Transnational Corporations) 
 
members - (54) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 

----- 

Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) 
 
established - 29 April 1958 
 
aim - to promote economic development as a regional commission of the UN's 
Economic and Social Council 
 
members - (53) Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, 
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, 
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa (suspended), Sudan, 
Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe  
 
associate members - (2) France, UK 

----- 

Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) 
 
see Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) 

----- 

Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) 
 
established - 28 March 1947 
 
aim - to promote economic development as a regional commission of the UN's 
Economic and Social Council 
 
members - (54) Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, 
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, 
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Monaco, Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, UK, US, Uzbekistan, Yugoslavia 

----- 

Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA) 
 
see Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) 

----- 

Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) 
 
established - 25 February 1948 as Economic Commission for Latin America 
(ECLA) 
 
aim - to promote economic development as a regional commission of the UN's 
Economic and Social Council 
 
members - (41) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, The Bahamas, Barbados, 
Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, 
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Italy, Jamaica, Mexico, Netherlands, 
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint 
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain, Suriname, Trinidad and 
Tobago, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela 
 
associate members - (6) Aruba, British Virgin Islands, Montserrat, 
Netherlands Antilles, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands 

----- 

Economic Commission for Western Asia (ECWA) 
 
see Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) 

----- 

Economic Community of Central African States (CEEAC)-acronym from 
Communaute Economique des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale 
 
established - 18 October 1983 
 
aim - to promote regional economic cooperation and establish a Central 
African Common Market 
 
members - (10) Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, 
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Zaire 
 
observer - (1) Angola 

----- 

Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL) 
  
note - acronym from Communaute Economique des Pays des Grands Lacs 
 
established - 26 September 1976 
 
aim - to promote regional economic cooperation and integration 
 
members - (3) Burundi, Rwanda, Zaire  

----- 

Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) 
 
established - 28 May 1975 
 
aim - to promote regional economic cooperation 
 
members - (16) Benin, Burkina, Cape Verde, Cote d'Ivoire, The Gambia, 
Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, 
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo 

----- 

Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) 
 
established - NA 1985 
 
aim - to promote regional cooperation in trade, transportation, 
communications, tourism, cultural affairs, and economic development 
 
members - (11) Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, 
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkey, "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus", 
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan 

----- 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) 
 
established - 15 April 1991 
 
aim - to facilitate the transition of seven centrally planned economies in 
Europe (Bulgaria, former Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, former 
USSR, and former Yugoslavia) to market economies by committing 60% of its 
loans to privatization 
 
members - (58) Albania, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, European 
Community (EC), European Investment Bank (EIB), Estonia, Finland, France, 
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Kazakhstan, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Moldova, Morocco, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, 
Poland, Portugal, Russia, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Tajikistan, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, UK, US, Uzbekistan, Yugoslavia; note - includes all 
25 members of the OECD; also includes the EC as a single entity 

----- 

European Community (or European Communities, EC) was established 8 April 
1965 to integrate the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), the 
European Coal and Steel Community (ESC), the European Economic Community 
(EEC or Common Market), and to establish a completely integrated common 
market and an eventual federation of Europe; merged into the European Union 
(EU) on 7 February 1992; member states at the time of merger were Belgium, 
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
Portugal, Spain, UK 

----- 

European Free Trade Association (EFTA) 
 
established - 4 January 1960 
 
effective - 3 May 1960 
 
aim - to promote expansion of free trade 
 
members - (7) Austria, Finland, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Sweden, 
Switzerland  

----- 

European Investment Bank (EIB) 
 
established - 25 March 1957 
 
effective - 1 January 1958 
 
aim - to promote economic development of the EU 
 
members - (12) Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, UK  

----- 

European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) 
 
note - acronym retained from the predecessor organization Conseil Europeen 
pour la Recherche Nucleaire 
 
established - 1 July 1953 
 
effective - 29 September 1954 
 
aim - to foster nuclear research for peaceful purposes only 
 
members - (19) Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, 
Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK 
 
observers - (6) EC, Israel, Russia, Turkey, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Yugoslavia 

----- 

European Space Agency (ESA) 
 
established - 31 July 1973 
 
effective - 1 May 1975 
 
aim - to promote peaceful cooperation in space research and technology 
 
members - (13) Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, 
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK 
 
associate member - (1) Finland 
 
cooperating state - (1) Canada 

----- 

European Union (EU) 
 
note - evolved from the European Community (EC) 
 
established - 7 February 1992 
 
effective - 1 November 1993 
 
aim - to coordinate policy among the 12 members in three fields: economics, 
building on the European Economic Community's (EEC) efforts to establish a 
common market and eventually a common currency; defense, within the concept 
of a Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP); and justice and home 
affairs, including immigration, drugs, terrorism, and improved living and 
working conditions 
 
members-(12) Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, UK 

----- 

First World 
 
another term for countries with advanced, industrialized economies; this 
term is fading from use; see developed countries (DCs) 

----- 

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
 
established - 16 October 1945 
 
aim - UN specialized agency to raise living standards and increase 
availability of agricultural products 
 
members - (162) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, 
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, 
Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, 
Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, 
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial 
Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, EC, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, 
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, 
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, 
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, 
Kuwait, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, 
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, 
Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, 
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, 
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, 
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UAE, 
UK, US, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, 
Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe  
 
associate member - (1) Puerto Rico 

----- 

Former USSR/Eastern Europe (former USSR/EE) 
 
the middle group in the comprehensive but mutually exclusive hierarchy of 
developed countries (DCs), former USSR/Eastern Europe (former USSR/EE), and 
less developed countries (LDCs); these countries are in political and 
economic transition and may well be grouped differently in the near future; 
this group of 27 countries consists of Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, 
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, 
Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Moldova, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovakia, 
Slovenia, Tajikistan, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan 

----- 

Four Dragons 
 
the four small Asian less developed countries (LDCs) that have experienced 
unusually rapid economic growth; also known as the Four Tigers; this group 
includes Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan 

----- 

Four Tigers 
 
another term for the Four Dragons; see Four Dragons 

----- 

Franc Zone (FZ) 
 
established - NA 
 
aim - to form a monetary union among countries whose currencies are linked 
to the French franc 
 
members - (15) Benin, Burkina, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, 
Comoros, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Gabon, Mali, 
Niger, Senegal, Togo; note - France includes metropolitan France, the four 
overseas departments of France (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, 
Reunion), the two territorial collectivities of France (Mayotte, Saint 
Pierre and Miquelon), and the three overseas territories of France (French 
Polynesia, New Caledonia, Wallis and Futuna)  

----- 

Front Line States (FLS) 
 
established - NA 
 
aim - to achieve black majority rule in South Africa 
 
members - (7) Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe 

----- 

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 
 
note - to be subsumed by the World Trade Organization on 31 December 1994 
 
established - 30 October 1947 
 
effective - 1 January 1948 
 
aim - to promote the expansion of international trade on a 
nondiscriminatory basis 
 
members - (117) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, 
Brazil, Brunei, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African 
Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El 
Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, South Korea, 
Kuwait, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Macau, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, 
Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, 
Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, 
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, 
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, 
UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe 

----- 

Group of 2 (G-2) 
 
established - informal term that came into use about 1986 
 
aim - bilateral economic cooperation between the two most powerful economic 
giants 
 
members - (2) Japan, US 

----- 

Group of 3 (G-3) 
 
established - NA October 1990 
 
aim - mechanism for policy coordination 
 
members - (3) Colombia, Mexico, Venezuela  

----- 

Group of 5 (G-5) 
 
established - 22 September 1985 
 
aim - to coordinate the economic policies of the five major non-Communist 
economic powers 
 
members - (5) France, Germany, Japan, UK, US 

----- 

Group of 6 (G-6) 
 
note - also known as Groupe des Six Sur le Desarmement not to be confused 
with the Big Six 
 
established - 22 May 1984 
 
aim - to achieve nuclear disarmament 
 
members - (6) Argentina, Greece, India, Mexico, Sweden, Tanzania 

----- 

Group of 7 (G-7) 
 
note - membership is the same as the Big Seven 
 
established - 22 September 1985 
 
aim - to facilitate economic cooperation among the seven major non-
Communist economic powers 
 
members - (7) Group of 5 (France, Germany, Japan, UK, US) plus Canada and 
Italy  

----- 

Group of 8 (G-8) 
 
established - NA October 1975 
 
aim - to facilitate economic cooperation among the developed countries 
(DCs) that participated in the Conference on International Economic 
Cooperation (CIEC), held in several sessions between NA December 1975 and 3 
June 1977 
 
members - (8) Australia, Canada, EU (as one member), Japan, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, US 

----- 

Group of 9 (G-9) 
 
established - NA 
 
aim - informal group that meets occasionally on matters of mutual interest 
 
members - (9) Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, 
Romania, Sweden, Yugoslavia  

----- 

Group of 10 (G-10) 
 
note - also known as the Paris Club, wealthiest members of the IMF who 
provide most of the money to be loaned and act as the informal steering 
committee; name persists in spite of the addition of Switzerland on NA 
April 1984 
 
 
established - NA October 1962 
 
aim - to make credit policy 
 
members - (11) Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, 
Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US 

----- 

Group of 11 (G-11) 
 
note - also known as the Cartagena Group 
 
established - 22 June 1984, in Cartagena, Colombia 
 
aim - to provide a forum for largest debtor nations in Latin America 
 
members - (11) Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela 

----- 

Group of 15 (G-15) 
 
note - byproduct of the Non-Aligned Movement 
 
established - September 1989 
 
aim - to promote economic cooperation among developing nations; to act as 
the main political organ for the Non-Aligned Movement 
 
members - (15) Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, India, Indonesia, 
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, Senegal, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, 
Zimbabwe 

----- 

Group of 19 (G-19) 
 
established - NA October 1975 
 
aim - to represent the interests of the less developed countries (LDCs) 
that participated in the Conference on International Economic Cooperation 
(CIEC) held in several sessions between NA December 1975 and 3 June 1977 
 
members - (19) Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Cameroon, Egypt, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Saudi 
Arabia, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia 

----- 

Group of 24 (G-24) 
 
established - NA January 1972 
 
aim - to promote the interests of developing countries in Africa, Asia, and 
Latin America within the IMF 
 
members - (24) Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Iran, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Syria, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire 

----- 

Group of 30 (G-30) 
 
established - NA 1979 
 
aim - to discuss and propose solutions to the world's economic problems 
 
members - (30) informal group of 30 leading international bankers, 
economists, financial experts, and businessmen organized by Johannes 
Witteveen (former managing director of the IMF) 

----- 

Group of 33 (G-33) 
 
established - NA 1987 
 
aim - to promote solutions to international economic problems 
 
members - (33) leading economists from 13 countries 

----- 

Group of 77 (G-77) 
 
established - NA October 1967 
 
aim - to promote economic cooperation among developing countries; name 
persists in spite of increased membership 
 
members - (128 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Afghanistan, 
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, 
Brunei, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central 
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, The Gambia, 
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, 
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South 
Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, 
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, 
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, 
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, 
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, 
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, 
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, UAE, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, 
Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, 
Palestine Liberation Organization 

----- 

Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
 
note - also known as the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the 
Gulf  
 
established - 25 May 1981 
 
aim - to promote regional cooperation in economic, social, political, and 
military affairs 
 
members - (6) Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE 

----- 

Habitat 
 
see Commission on Human Settlements 

----- 

Hexagonal Group 
 
see Central European Initiative (CEI) 

----- 

high-income countries 
 
another term for the industrialized countries with high per capita 
GNPs/GDPs; see developed countries (DCs)  

----- 

industrial countries 
 
another term for the developed countries; see developed countries (DCs)  

----- 

Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) 
 
note - also known as Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo (BID) 
 
established - 8 April 1959 
 
effective - 30 December 1959 
 
aim - to promote economic and social development in Latin America 
 
members - (44) Argentina, Austria, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Guatemala, 
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Mexico, 
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Spain, 
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, US, Uruguay, 
Venezuela 

----- 

Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD) 
 
established - 15-16 January 1986 
 
aim - to promote cooperation on drought-related 
matters 
 
members - (6) Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda 

----- 

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
 
established - 26 October 1956 
 
effective - 29 July 1957 
 
aim - to promote peaceful uses of atomic energy 
 
members - (116) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, 
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Burma, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, 
Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Holy See, 
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, South Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia, 
Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, 
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, 
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra 
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yugoslavia 
(suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Bank for Economic Cooperation (IBEC) 
 
was established on 22 October 1963 to promote economic cooperation and 
development; members were Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, 
Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, USSR, Vietnam; now it is a Russian bank 
with a new charter 

----- 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 
 
note - also known as the World Bank 
 
established - 22 July 1944 
 
effective - 27 December 1945 
 
aim - UN specialized agency that initially promoted economic rebuilding 
after World War II and now provides economic development loans 
 
members - (177) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, 
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El 
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, 
Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, 
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, 
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, 
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and 
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, 
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, 
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) 
 
established - NA 1919 
 
aim - to promote free trade and private enterprise and to represent 
business interests at national and international levels 
 
members - (59 national councils) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Brazil, Burkina, Cameroon, Canada, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Cyprus, 
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Iceland, 
India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, South Korea, 
Kuwait, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, 
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, 
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Taiwan, Togo, 
Tunisia, Turkey, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire 

----- 

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
 
established - 7 December 1944 
 
effective - 4 April 1947 
 
aim - UN specialized agency to promote international cooperation in civil 
aviation  
 
members - (181) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, 
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, 
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, 
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, 
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, 
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, North Korea, 
South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, 
Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, 
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of 
Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, 
Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, 
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, 
Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, 
Somalia, South Africa (suspended), Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, 
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, 
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, 
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) 
 
established - NA 1863 
 
aim - to provide humanitarian aid in wartime 
 
members - (25 individuals) all Swiss nationals 

----- 

International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) 
 
established - NA December 1949 
 
aim - to promote the trade union movement 
 
members - (164 national organizations in the following 117 areas) Antigua 
and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, 
Barbados, Basque Country, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bermuda, Botswana, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, 
China, Colombia, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Curacao, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, 
Falkland Islands, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, 
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Holy See, Honduras, Hong Kong, Iceland, 
India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kiribati, South 
Korea, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, 
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Montserrat, Morocco, Netherlands, New 
Caledonia, NZ, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, 
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Puerto Rico, Romania, 
Rwanda, Saint Helena, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and 
the Grenadines, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, 
Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UK, 
US, Venezuela, Western Samoa, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
 
note - also known as the World Court 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - primary judicial organ of the UN 
 
members - (15 judges) elected by the UN General Assembly and Security 
Council to represent all principal legal systems 

----- 

International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) 
 
established - 13 June 1956 
 
aim - to promote international cooperation between criminal police 
authorities 
 
members - (170) Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Aruba, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, 
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, 
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, 
France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, 
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, 
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, 
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, 
Nepal, Netherlands, Netherlands Antilles, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, 
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and 
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, 
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, 
Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
subbureaus - (11) American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin 
Islands, Cayman Islands, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Macau, Montserrat, Puerto 
Rico, Turks and Caicos Islands  

----- 

International Development Association (IDA) 
 
established - 26 January 1960 
 
effective - 24 September 1960 
 
aim - UN specialized agency and IBRD affiliate that provides economic loans 
for low income countries 
 
members - (156)  
 
Part I - (24 more economically advanced countries) Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, 
Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Luxembourg, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Russia, South 
Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, UAE, UK, US  
 
Part II - (132 less developed nations) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, 
Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, 
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, 
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, 
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, 
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
Kiribati, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, 
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, 
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, 
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, 
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, 
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Swaziland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Western 
Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Energy Agency (IEA) 
 
established - 15 November 1974 
 
aim - established by the OECD to promote cooperation on energy matters, 
especially emergency oil sharing and relations between oil consumers and 
oil producers 
 
members - (23) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
NZ, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US 

----- 

International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 
established - 25 May 1955 
 
effective - 20 July 1956 
 
aim - UN specialized agency and IBRD affiliate that helps private 
enterprise sector in economic development 
 
members - (159) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, 
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, 
Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, 
Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, 
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, 
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Kuwait, 
Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, 
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe  

----- 

International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
 
established - NA November 1974 
 
aim - UN specialized agency that promotes agricultural development 
 
members - (150)  
 
Category I - (21 industrialized aid contributors) Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, 
US 
 
Category II - (12 petroleum-exporting aid contributors) Algeria, Gabon, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE, 
Venezuela 
  
Category III - (117 aid recipients) Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Antigua 
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, 
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, 
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El 
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Israel, 
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, 
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, 
Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, 
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, 
Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Investment Bank (IIB) 
 
established on 7 July 1970; to promote economic development; members were 
Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, Poland, 
Romania, USSR, Vietnam; now it is a Russian bank with a new charter  

----- 

International Labor Organization (ILO) 
 
established - 11 April 1919 (affiliated with the UN 14 December 1946) 
 
aim - UN specialized agency concerned with world labor issues 
 
members - (169) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, 
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, 
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, 
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, 
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, 
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, 
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New 
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, 
Russia, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, 
Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 

----- 

International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
 
note - name changed from Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative 
Organization (IMCO) on 22 May 1982  
 
established - 17 March 1958 
 
aim - UN specialized agency concerned with world maritime affairs 
 
members - (146) Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, 
Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, 
Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, 
Burma, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El 
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, 
France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, 
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, 
Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, 
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, 
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, 
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, 
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, 
Turkey, Turkmenistan, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, 
Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire 
 
associate members - (2) Hong Kong, Macau 

----- 

International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) 
 
established - 3 September 1976 
 
effective - 26 July 1979 
 
aim - to provide worldwide communications for maritime shipping and other 
applications 
 
members - (69) Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, 
Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, South Korea, Kuwait, Liberia, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritius, Monaco, 
Mozambique, Netherlands, NZ, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
Singapore, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
Turkey, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Yugoslavia 

----- 

International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
 
established - 22 July 1944 
 
effective - 27 December 1945 
 
aim - UN specialized agency concerned with world monetary stability and 
economic development 
 
members - (179) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, 
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El 
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, 
Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, 
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, 
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, 
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao 
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, 
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, 
Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, 
Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, 
Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
  
observers-(3) Holy See, North Korea, Monaco  

----- 

International Olympic Committee (IOC) 
 
established-23 June 1894 
 
aim-to promote the Olympic ideals and administer the Olympic games: 1994 
Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway (12-27 February); 1996 Summer 
Olympics in Atlanta, United States (20 July-4 August); 1998 Winter Olympics 
in Nagano, Japan (date NA) 
 
members-(184) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, American Samoa, Andorra, 
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Aruba, Australia, Austria, 
Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, 
Belize, Benin, Bermuda, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, 
Brazil, British Virgin Islands, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Cameroon, 
Canada, Cayman Islands, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, 
France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guam, 
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, 
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, 
Jordan, Kazahkstan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, 
Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, 
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Netherlands Antilles, NZ, 
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New 
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Puerto Rico, Qatar, 
Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, 
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, 
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Taiwan, Tajikistan, 
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Virgin Islands, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia, 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
 
established as Provisional Intergovernmental Committee for the Movement of 
Migrants from Europe; renamed Intergovernmental Committee for European 
Migration (ICEM) on 15 November 1952; renamed Intergovernmental Committee 
for Migration (ICM) in November 1980; current name adopted 14 November 1989 
 
established - 5 December 1951 
 
aim - to facilitate orderly international emigration and immigration 
 
members - (48) Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, 
Bolivia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Kenya, South Korea, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, 
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Thailand, Uganda, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia 
 
observers - (40) Albania, Belize, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cape Verde, Croatia, 
Czech Republic, Federation of Ethnic Communities' Council of Australia 
Inc., Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Holy See, India, Indonesia, Japan, Japan 
International Friendship and Welfare Foundation, Jordan, Latvia, Malta, 
Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, NZ, Niwano Peace Foundation, Partnership with the 
Children of the Third World, Presiding Bishop's Fund for World 
Relief/Episcopal Church, Refugee Council of Australia, Romania, Russia, San 
Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, 
Turkey, UK, Vietnam, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
 
established - NA February 1947 
 
aim - to promote the development of international standards 
 
members - (73 national standards organizations) Albania, Algeria, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, 
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, 
Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Libya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, 
Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, 
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yugoslavia, 
Zimbabwe 
 
correspondent members - (20) Bahrain, Barbados, Brunei, Estonia, Hong Kong, 
Jordan, Kuwait, Lithuania, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, 
Nepal, Oman, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Seychelles, Uganda, UAE 
 
----- 
 
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement 
 
established - NA 1928 
 
aim - to promote worldwide humanitarian aid through the International 
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in wartime, and League of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies (LORCS) in peacetime 
 
members - (9) 2 representatives from ICRC, 2 from LORCS, and 5 from 
national societies elected by the international conference of the 
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement 
 
----- 
 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
 
established - 9 December 1932 
 
effective - 1 January 1934 
 
affiliated with the UN - 15 November 1947 
 
aim - UN specialized agency concerned with world telecommunications 
 
members - (182) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, 
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, 
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, 
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, 
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, 
Holy See, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
Kiribati, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, 
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, 
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated 
States of Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, 
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, 
South Africa (suspended), Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, 
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) 
 
established - 20 August 1971 
 
effective - 12 February 1973 
 
aim - to develop and operate a global commercial telecommunications 
satellite system 
 
members - (126) Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, 
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, 
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Burkina, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, 
Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Holy See, 
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, South Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, 
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New 
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, 
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, 
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
nonsignatory users - (56) Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Belarus, 
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, 
Cambodia, Comoros, Cook Islands, Cuba, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, 
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, 
North Korea, Laos, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Lithuania, Maldives, Malta, 
Marshall Islands, Moldova, Mongolia, Namibia, Nauru, Niue, Poland, Sao Tome 
and Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon 
Islands, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, 
Tajikistan, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Turkmenistan, 
Tuvalu, Ukraine, Vanuatu, Western Samoa 

----- 
 
Islamic Development Bank (IDB) 
 
established - 15 December 1973 
 
aim - to promote Islamic economic aid and social development 
 
members - (47 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Afghanistan 
(suspended), Albania, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, 
Brunei, Burkina, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, 
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, 
Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, UAE, Yemen, 
Palestine Liberation Organization 
 
----- 
 
Latin American Economic System (LAES) 
 
note - also known as Sistema Economico Latinoamericana (SELA) 
 
established - 17 October 1975 
 
aim - to promote economic and social development through regional 
cooperation 
 
members - (27) Argentina, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela  
 
----- 
 
Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) 
 
note - also known as Asociacion Latinoamericana de Integracion (ALADI) 
 
established - 12 August 1980 
 
effective - 18 March 1981 
 
aim - to promote freer regional trade 
 
members - (11) Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela 
  
observers - (16) Commission of the European Communities, Costa Rica, Cuba, 
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Inter-American 
Development Bank, Italy, Nicaragua, Organization of American States, 
Panama, Portugal, Spain, United Nations Development Program, United Nations 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 
 
----- 
 
League of Arab States (LAS) 
 
see Arab League (AL) 
 
----- 
 
League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (LORCS) 
 
established - 5 May 1919 
 
aim - to provide humanitarian aid in peacetime 
 
members - (153) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, 
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, 
Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African 
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, 
Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, The Gambia, 
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, 
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, 
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, 
Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, 
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, 
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, 
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, 
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, 
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Uganda, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, 
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
associate members - (2) Equatorial Guinea, Gabon 
 
----- 
 
least developed countries (LLDCs) 
 
that subgroup of the less developed countries (LDCs) initially identified 
by the UN General Assembly in 1971 as having no significant economic 
growth, per capita GNPs/GDPs normally less than $1,000, and low literacy 
rates; also known as the undeveloped countries. The 42 LLDCs are: 
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, 
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial 
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, 
Kiribati, Laos, Lesotho, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, 
Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, 
Tanzania, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Yemen 

----- 
 
less developed countries (LDCs) 
 
the bottom group in the comprehensive but mutually exclusive hierarchy of 
developed countries (DCs), former USSR/Eastern Europe (former USSR/EE), and 
less developed countries (LDCs); mainly countries with low levels of 
output, living standards, and technology; per capita GNPs/GDPs are 
generally below $5,000 and often less than $1,500; however, the group also 
includes a number of countries with high per capita incomes, areas of 
advanced technology, and rapid rates of growth; includes the advanced 
developing countries, developing countries, Four Dragons (Four Tigers), 
least developed countries (LLDCs), low-income countries, middle-income 
countries, newly industrializing economies (NIEs), the South, Third World, 
underdeveloped countries, undeveloped countries; the 174 LDCs are: 
Afghanistan, Algeria, American Samoa, Angola, Anguilla, Antigua and 
Barbuda, Argentina, Aruba, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, 
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, British Virgin Islands, 
Brunei, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Cayman 
Islands, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Christmas Island, 
Cocos Islands, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Falkland Islands, 
Fiji, French Guiana, French Polynesia, Gabon, The Gambia, Gaza Strip, 
Ghana, Gibraltar, Greenland, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guam, Guatemala, 
Guernsey, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hong Kong, India, 
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Jersey, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, North 
Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Macau, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Isle of Man, Marshall 
Islands, Martinique, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mayotte, Federated States of 
Micronesia, Mongolia, Montserrat, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, 
Nepal, Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, 
Niue, Norfolk Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Oman, Trust Territory of 
the Pacific Islands (Palau), Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, 
Peru, Philippines, Pitcairn Islands, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Reunion, Rwanda, 
Saint Helena, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Pierre and 
Miquelon, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, 
Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Taiwan, Tanzania, 
Thailand, Togo, Tokelau, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turks and 
Caicos Islands, Tuvalu, UAE, Uganda, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, 
Virgin Islands, Wallis and Futuna, West Bank, Western Sahara, Western 
Samoa, Yemen, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
low-income countries 
 
another term for those less developed countries with below-average per 
capita GNPs/GDPs; see less developed countries (LDCs) 
 
----- 
 
London Suppliers Group 
 
see Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) 
 
----- 
 
Mercado Comun del Cono Sur (MERCOSUR) 
 
see Southern Cone Common Market 
 
----- 
 
middle-income countries 
 
another term for those less developed countries with above-average per 
capita GNPs/GDPs; see less developed countries (LDCs) 
 
----- 
 
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) 
 
established - April 1987 
 
aim - to arrest missile proliferation by controlling the export of key 
missile technologies and equipment 
 
members - (25) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
UK, US 
 
----- 
 
Near Abroad 
 
the 14 non-Russian successor states of the USSR, in which 25 million ethnic 
Russians live and in which Moscow has expressed a strong national security 
interest 
 
----- 
 
newly industrializing countries (NICs) 
 
former term for the newly industrializing economies; see newly 
industrializing economies (NIEs) 
 
----- 
 
newly industrializing economies (NIEs) 
 
that subgroup of the less developed countries (LDCs) that has experienced 
particularly rapid industrialization of their economies; formerly known as 
the newly industrializing countries (NICs); also known as advanced 
developing countries; usually includes the Four Dragons (Hong Kong, South 
Korea, Singapore, Taiwan) plus Brazil 

----- 
 
Nonaligned Movement (NAM) 
 
established - 1-6 September 1961 
 
aim - to establish political and military cooperation apart from the 
traditional East or West blocs 
 
members - (107 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Afghanistan, 
Algeria, Angola, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin, 
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brunei, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, 
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, 
Comoros, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, 
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, 
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, 
Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, 
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, 
Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, 
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, 
Syria, Tanzania, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, UAE, 
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe, Palestine Liberation Organization 
 
observers - (21) African National Congress, Afro-Asian Solidarity 
Organization, Antigua and Barbuda, Arab League, Armenia, Brazil, China, 
Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominica, El Salvador, Islamic Conference, Kanaka 
Socialist National Liberation Front (New Caledonia), Mexico, Mongolia, 
Organization of African Unity, Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, Socialist 
Party of Puerto Rico, Thailand, UN, Uruguay 
 
guests - (21) Australia, Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, 
Dominican Republic, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Netherlands, NZ, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland 
 
----- 
 
Nordic Council (NC) 
 
established - 16 March 1952 
 
effective - 12 February 1953 
 
aim - to promote regional economic, cultural, and environmental cooperation 
 
members - (5) Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden; note - Denmark 
includes Faroe Islands and Greenland, and Finland includes Aland Islands 
 
----- 
 
Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) 
 
established - 4 December 1975 
 
effective - 1 June 1976 
 
aim - to promote economic cooperation and development 
 
members - (5) Denmark (including Faroe Islands and Greenland), Finland 
(including Aland Islands), Iceland, Norway, Sweden 
 
----- 
 
North 
 
a popular term for the rich industrialized countries generally located in 
the northern portion of the Northern Hemisphere; the counterpart of the 
South; see developed countries (DCs) 
 
----- 
 
North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) 
 
note - an extension of NATO 
 
established - 8 November 1991 
 
effective - 20 December 1991 
 
aim - to form a forum to discuss cooperation concerning mutual political 
and security issues 
 
members - (38) Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Moldova, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, 
Russia, Slovakia, Spain, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, UK, US, 
Uzbekistan 
 
----- 
 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
 
established - 17 September 1949 
 
aim - to promote mutual defense and cooperation 
 
members - (16) Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, 
Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, UK, US 
 
----- 
 
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) 
 
established - NA 1958 
 
aim - associated with OECD, seeks to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy 
 
members - (23) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, 
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US 
 
----- 
 
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) 
 
note - also known as the London Suppliers Group 
 
established - 1974 
 
aim - to establish guidelines for exports of technical information, 
processing equipment for uranium enrichment and nuclear materials to 
countries of proliferation concern and regions of conflict and instability 
 
members - (28) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, 
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, 
Russia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US  
 
----- 
 
Organismo para la Proscripcion de las Armas Nucleares en la America Latina 
y el Caribe (OPANAL) 
 
see Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (OPANAL)  
 
----- 
 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
 
established - 14 December 1960 
 
effective - 30 September 1961 
 
aim - to promote economic cooperation and development 
 
members - (25) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, 
Mexico, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Turkey, UK, US 
 
special member - (1) EU 
 
----- 
 
Organization of African Unity (OAU) 
 
established - 25 May 1963 
 
aim - to promote unity and cooperation among African states 
 
members - (53) Algeria, Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, 
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, 
Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, Sao Tome and 
Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, 
Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
Organization of American States (OAS) 
 
established - 30 April 1948 
 
effective - 13 December 1951 
 
aim - to promote regional peace and security as well as economic and social 
development 
 
members - (35) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, The Bahamas, Barbados, 
Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba 
(excluded from formal participation since 1962), Dominica, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, 
Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, 
Trinidad and Tobago, US, Uruguay, Venezuela 
 
observers - (31) Algeria, Angola, Austria, Belgium, Central American 
Parliament, Cyprus, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, EU, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Holy See, Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea, 
Morocco, Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saudi 
Arabia, Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia 
 
----- 
 
Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) 
 
established - 9 January 1968 
 
aim - to promote cooperation in the petroleum industry 
 
members - (10) Algeria, Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, Syria, UAE 
 
----- 
 
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) 
 
established - 18 June 1981 
 
effective - 4 July 1981 
 
aim - to promote political, economic, and defense cooperation 
 
members - (7) Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint 
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
  
associate member - (1) British Virgin Islands 
 
----- 
 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) 
 
established - 14 September 1960 
 
aim - to coordinate petroleum policies 
 
members - (12) Algeria, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, 
Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Venezuela 
 
----- 
 
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) 
 
established - 22-25 September 1969 
 
aim - to promote Islamic solidarity and cooperation in economic, social, 
cultural, and political affairs 
 
members - (47 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Afghanistan 
(suspended), Albania, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, 
Brunei, Burkina, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, 
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, 
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, 
Syria, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, UAE, Yemen, 
Palestine Liberation Organization 
 
observers - (4) Kazakhstan, Mozambique, Nigeria, "Turkish Republic of 
Northern Cyprus" 
 
----- 
 
Paris Club 
 
see Group of 10 
 
----- 
 
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) 
 
established - 29 July 1899 
 
aim - to facilitate the settlement of international disputes 
 
members - (78) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, 
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, 
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Senegal, Slovakia, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, 
Ukraine, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
Population Commission 
 
established - 3 October 1946 
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization dealing with population 
matters of importance to the UN 
 
members - (27) selected on a rotating basis from all regions  
 
----- 
 
Rio Group (RG) 
 
note - formerly known as Grupo de los Ocho, established in December 1986 
 
established - NA 1988 
 
aim - a consultation mechanism on regional Latin American issues 
  
members - (11) Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Mexico, Paraguay, Peru (suspended), Uruguay, Venezuela; note-Panama was 
expelled in 1988; Peru was suspended after April 1992 coup 
 
----- 
 
Second World 
 
another term for the traditionally Marxist-Leninist states with 
authoritarian governments and command economies based on the Soviet model; 
the term is fading from use; see centrally planned economies  
 
----- 
 
socialist countries in general, countries in which the government owns and 
plans the use of the major factors of production; note - the term is 
sometimes used incorrectly as a synonym for Communist countries 
 
----- 
 
South 
 
a popular term for the poorer, less industrialized countries generally 
located south of the developed countries; the counterpart of the North; see 
less developed countries (LDCs) 
 
----- 
 
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) 
 
established - 8 December 1985 
 
aim - to promote economic, social, and cultural cooperation 
 
members - (7) Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri 
Lanka  
 
----- 
 
South Pacific Commission (SPC) 
 
established - 6 February 1947 
 
effective - 29 July 1948 
 
aim - to promote regional cooperation in economic and social matters 
 
members - (27) American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, France, 
French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of 
Micronesia, Nauru, New Caledonia, NZ, Niue, Northern Mariana Islands, Trust 
Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau), Papua New Guinea, Pitcairn 
Islands, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, UK, US, Vanuatu, Wallis 
and Futuna, Western Samoa  
 
----- 
 
South Pacific Forum (SPF) 
 
established - 5 August 1971 
 
aim - to promote regional cooperation in political matters 
 
members - (15) Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, 
Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, NZ, Niue, Papua New Guinea, Solomon 
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Western Samoa 
 
observer - (1) Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau) 
 
----- 
 
South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement (SPARTECA) 
 
established - NA 1981 
 
aim - to redress unequal trade relationship of Australia and New Zealand 
with small island economies in Pacific region 
 
members - (15) Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, 
Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, NZ, Niue, Papua New Guinea, Solomon 
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Western Samoa  
 
----- 
 
Southern African Customs Union (SACU) 
 
established - 11 December 1969 
 
aim - to promote free trade and cooperation in customs matters 
 
members - (9) Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland  
 
----- 
 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) 
 
note - evolved from the Southern African Development Coordination 
Conference (SADCC) 
 
established - 17 August 1992 
 
aim - to promote regional economic development and integration 
 
members - (10) Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, 
Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe  
 
----- 
 
Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR) 
 
established - 26 March 1991 
 
aim - regional economic cooperation 
 
members - (4) Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay 
 
----- 
 
Statistical Commission 
 
established - 21 June 1946 
 
aim - Economic and Social Council organization dealing with development and 
standardization of national statistics of interest to the UN 
 
members - (25) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 
 
----- 
 
Third World 
 
another term for the less developed countries; the term is fading from use; 
see less developed countries (LDCs) 
 
----- 
 
underdeveloped countries 
 
refers to those less developed countries with the potential for above-
average economic growth; see less developed countries (LDCs) 
 
----- 
 
undeveloped countries 
 
refers to those extremely poor less developed countries (LDCs) with little 
prospect for economic growth; see least developed countries (LLDCs) 
 
----- 
 
Union Douaniere et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale (UDEAC) 
 
see Central African Customs and Economic Union (UDEAC) 
 
----- 
 
United Nations (UN) 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - to maintain international peace and security and to promote 
cooperation involving economic, social, cultural and humanitarian problems 
 
members - (183 excluding Yugoslavia) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, 
Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, 
Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, 
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, 
Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, 
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, 
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, 
France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, 
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, 
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, 
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, 
Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, 
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of 
Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, 
Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, 
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon 
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, 
Swaziland, Sweden, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe; note - all UN members are represented in the General 
Assembly 
 
observers - (2 plus the Palestine Liberation Organization) Holy See, 
Switzerland, Palestine Liberation Organization 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) 
 
note - successor to original UNAVEM 
 
established - 20 December 1988 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to verify the withdrawal of 
Cuban troops from Angola 
 
members - (25) Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Congo, Czech Republic, 
Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, India, Ireland, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, 
Netherlands, NZ, Nigeria, Norway, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Spain, 
Sweden, Yugoslavia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) 
 
note - acronym retained from the predecessor organization UN International 
Children's Emergency Fund 
 
established - 11 December 1946 
 
aim - to help establish child health and welfare services 
 
members - (41) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD) 
 
established - 30 December 1964 
 
aim - to promote international trade 
 
members - (187) all UN members plus Holy See, Switzerland, Tonga 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP) 
 
established - 22 November 1965 
 
aim - to provide technical assistance to stimulate economic and social 
development 
 
members - (48) selected on a rotating basis from all regions  
 
----- 
 
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) 
 
established - 31 May 1974  
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to observe the 1973 Arab-
Israeli ceasefire 
 
members - (4) Austria, Canada, Finland, Poland 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 
 
established - 16 November 1945 
 
effective - 4 November 1946 
 
aim - to promote cooperation in education, science, and culture 
 
members - (178) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, 
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, 
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial 
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The 
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, 
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, 
Kenya, Kiribati, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, 
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, 
Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, 
Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, 
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, 
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, 
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, 
Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
associate members - (3) Aruba, British Virgin Islands, Netherlands Antilles 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) 
 
established - 15 December 1972 
 
aim - to promote international cooperation on all environmental matters 
 
members - (58) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) 
 
established - 4 March 1964 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to serve as a peacekeeping 
force between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots in Cyprus 
 
members - (8) Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, 
Sweden, UK 
 
----- 
 
United Nations General Assembly 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - primary deliberative organ in the UN 
 
members - (184) all UN members are represented in the General Assembly 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)  
 
established - 17 November 1966  
 
effective - 1 January 1967 
 
aim - UN specialized agency that promotes industrial development especially 
among the members 
 
members - (165) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, 
Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, 
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, 
Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, 
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, 
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, 
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, 
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, 
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, 
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, 
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, 
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint 
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, 
Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, 
UK, US, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia 
(suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) 
 
established - 19 March 1978 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to confirm the withdrawal of 
Israeli forces, restore peace, and reestablish Lebanese authority in 
southern Lebanon 
 
members - (10) Fiji, Finland, France, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Nepal, Norway, 
Poland, Sweden  
 
----- 
 
United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM) 
 
established - 9 April 1991 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to observe and monitor the 
demilitarized zone established between Iraq and Kuwait 
 
members - (33) Argentina, Austria, Bangladesh, Canada, China, Denmark, 
Fiji, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, 
Italy, Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Russia, 
Senegal, Singapore, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela  
----- 
 
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) 
 
established - 13 August 1948 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to observe the 1949  
India-Pakistan ceasefire 
 
members - (8) Belgium, Chile, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, 
Uruguay 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara  
(MINURSO) 
 
established - 29 April 1991 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to supervise the  
referendum in Western Sahara 
 
members - (26) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada, 
China, Egypt, France, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Honduras, Ireland, Italy, 
Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, Pakistan, Poland, Russia, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
UK, US, Venezuela  
 
----- 
 
United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL) 
 
established - 20 May 1991 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to verify ceasefire 
arrangements and to monitor the maintenance of public order pending the 
organization of a new National Civil Police 
 
members - (16) Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, France, 
Guyana, India, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Venezuela 
 
----- 
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) 
 
established - 1993 for a period of six months 
 
aim - to verify compliance with the cease-fire agreement reached 27 July 
1993 and investigate reports of violations of that agreement 
 
members - (10) Austria, Bangladesh, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, 
Greece, Poland, Sierra Leone, Sweden, Switzerland 
 
----- 
United Nations Observer Mission Uganda-Rwanda (UNOMUR) 
 
established - 1993 for six months 
 
aim - to monitor the Uganda/Rwanda border to verify that no military 
assistance reaches Rwanda across the border 
 
members - (10) Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Fiji, Hungary, 
Netherlands, Senegal Slovakia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
 
established - 3 December 1949 
 
effective - 1 January 1951 
 
aim - to try to ensure the humanitarian treatment of refugees and find 
permanent solutions to refugee problems 
 
members - (46) Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, 
Canada, China, Colombia, Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Holy See, Hungary, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Somalia, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, 
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UK, US, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Operation in Mozambique (UNOMOZ) 
 
established - 16 December 1992 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to supervise the ceasefire 
 
members - (18) Argentina, Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Cape Verde, 
Czech Republic, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, India, Malaysia, Portugal, 
Russia, Spain, Sweden, Uruguay, Zambia 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) 
 
established - 24 April 1992 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to facilitate an immediate 
cessation of hostilities, to maintain a ceasefire in order to promote a 
political settlement, and to provide urgent humanitarian assistance 
 
members - (33) Argentina, Australia,  Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Egypt, 
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, 
South Korea, Malaysia, Morocco, Namibia, NZ, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, 
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UAE, US, Zambia,  
Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) 
 
note - acronym retained from predecessor organization UN Fund for 
Population Activities 
 
established - NA July 1967 
 
aim - to assist in both developed and developing countries dealing with 
population problems 
 
members - (51) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) 
 
established - 28 February 1992 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to create conditions for peace 
and security required for the negotiation of an overall settlement of the 
"Yugoslav" crisis 
 
members - (34) Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
Colombia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Ghana, India, 
Ireland, Jordan, Kenya, Luxembourg, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nigeria, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Tunisia, Ukraine, UK, Venezuela 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near 
East (UNRWA) 
 
established - 8 December 1949 
 
aim - to provide assistance to Palestinian refugees 
 
members - (10) Belgium, Egypt, France, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, 
Turkey, UK, US  
 
----- 
 
United Nations Secretariat 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - to serve as the primary administrative organ of the UN; a Secretary 
General is appointed for a five-year term by the General Assembly on the 
recommendation of the Security Council 
  
----- 
 
United Nations Security Council 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - to maintain international peace and security 
 
permanent members - (5) China, France, Russia, UK, US 
 
nonpermanent members - (10) elected for two-year terms by the UN General 
Assembly; Brazil (1993-94), Cape Verde (1992-93), Djibouti (1993-94), 
Hungary (1992-93), Japan (1992-93), Morocco (1992-93), NZ (1993-94), 
Pakistan (1993-94), Spain (1993-94), Venezuela (1992-93) 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC)  
 
established - 28 February 1992 
 
aim - established by the UN Security Council to contribute to the 
restoration and maintenance of peace and to the holding of free elections 
 
members - (45) Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, 
Brunei, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Egypt, Fiji, 
France, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Jordan, Kenya, Malaysia, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nigeria, Norway, 
Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Russia, Senegal, Singapore, Sweden, 
Thailand, Tunisia, UK, US, Uruguay 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) 
 
established - NA May 1948  
 
aim - initially established by the UN Security Council to supervise the 
1948 Arab-Israeli ceasefire and subsequently extended to work in the Sinai, 
Lebanon, Jordan, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 
 
members - (19) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, 
China, Denmark, Finland, France, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, 
Russia, Sweden, Switzerland, US 
 
----- 
 
United Nations Trusteeship Council 
 
established - 26 June 1945 
 
effective - 24 October 1945 
 
aim - to supervise the administration of the UN trust territories; only one 
of the original 11 trusteeships remains - the Trust Territory of the 
Pacific Islands (Palau) 
 
members - (5) China, France, Russia, UK, US 
 
----- 
 
Universal Postal Union (UPU) 
 
established - 9 October 1874, affiliated with the UN 15 November 1947 
 
effective - 1 July 1948 
 
aim - UN specialized agency that promotes international postal cooperation 
 
members-(185) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, 
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, 
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, 
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, 
Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, 
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, North Korea, 
South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, 
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, 
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Moldova, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, 
Netherlands Antilles, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Overseas 
Territories of the UK, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts 
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao 
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, 
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, 
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and 
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, 
US, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia 
(suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
------ 
 
Warsaw Pact (WP) 
 
was established 14 May 1955 to promote mutual defense; members met 1 July 
1991 to dissolve the alliance; member states at the time of dissolution 
were Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the USSR; 
earlier members included East Germany and Albania 
 
----- 
 
West African Development Bank (WADB) 
 
note - also known as Banque Ouest-Africaine de Developpement (BOAD) 
 
established - 14 November 1973 
 
aim - to promote regional economic development and integration 
 
members - (7) Benin, Burkina, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal,  
Togo 
 
----- 
 
West African Economic Community (CEAO) 
 
note - acronym from Communaute Economique de l'Afrique de l'Ouest 
 
established - 3 June 1972 
 
aim - to promote regional economic development 
 
members - (7) Benin, Burkina, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, 
Senegal 
  
observers - (2) Guinea, Togo 
 
----- 
 
Western European Union (WEU) 
 
established - 23 October 1954 
 
effective - 6 May 1955 
 
aim - mutual defense and progressive political unification 
 
members - (9) Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, 
Portugal, Spain, UK  
 
associate members - (4) Greece, Iceland, Norway, Turkey 
 
observers - (2) Denmark, Ireland 
 
----- 
 
World Bank 
 
see International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 
 
----- 
 
World Bank Group 
 
includes International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 
International Development Association (IDA), and International Finance 
Corporation (IFC)  
 
----- 
 
World Confederation of Labor (WCL) 
 
established - 19 June 1920 as the International Federation of Christian 
Trade Unions (IFCTU), renamed 4 October 1968 
 
aim - to promote the trade union movement 
 
members - (99 national organizations) Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Aruba, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, 
Bonaire Island, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, 
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, 
Cuba, Curacao, Cyprus, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
France, French Guiana, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guadeloupe, 
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Iran, 
Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Martinique, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Montserrat, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Puerto Rico, 
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Martin, Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Suriname, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, UK, US, 
Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
World Court 
 
see International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
 
----- 
 
World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) 
 
established - 3 October 1945 
 
aim - to promote the trade union movement 
 
members - (86) Afghanistan, Albania, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Cambodia, 
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, The 
Gambia, Greece, Guadeloupe, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, 
Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, 
North Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Madagascar, Martinique, Mauritius, 
Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, 
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Puerto Rico, Reunion, 
Romania, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, 
Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela, 
Vietnam, Yemen, Zaire 
 
----- 
 
World Food Council (WFC) 
 
established - 17 December 1974 
 
aim - ECOSOC organization that studies world food problems and recommends 
solutions 
 
members - (36) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 
 
----- 
 
World Food Program (WFP) 
 
established - 24 November 1961 
 
aim - ECOSOC organization that provides food aid to assist in development 
or disaster relief 
 
members - (42) selected on a rotating basis from all regions 
 
----- 
 
World Health Organization (WHO) 
 
established - 22 July 1946 
 
effective - 7 April 1948 
 
aim - UN specialized agency concerned with health matters 
 
members - (186) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, 
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, 
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial 
Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, 
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, 
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
Kiribati, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, 
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, 
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint 
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, 
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, 
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, 
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, 
Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, 
Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, 
Vietnam, Western Samoa, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe 
 
associate members - (2) Puerto Rico, Tokelau 
 
----- 
 
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) 
 
established - 14 July 1967 
 
effective - 26 April 1970 
 
aim - UN specialized agency concerned with the protection of literary, 
artistic, and scientific works 
 
members - (140) Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, 
Austria, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central 
African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, 
El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, 
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Holy See, Honduras, 
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Latvia, Lebanon, 
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, 
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi 
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, 
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, 
UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
----- 
 
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
 
established - 11 October 1947 
 
effective - 4 April 1951 
 
aim - specialized UN agency concerned with meteorological cooperation 
 
members - (173) Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, 
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, 
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, 
British Caribbean Territories, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burma, Burundi, 
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, 
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, 
Finland, France, French Polynesia, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, 
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hong 
Kong, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, 
Kuwait, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, 
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, 
Nepal, Netherlands, Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia, NZ, Nicaragua, 
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, 
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint 
Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra 
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South 
Africa (suspended), Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, The Former Yugoslav 
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe  
 
----- 
 
World Tourism Organization (WTO) 
 
established - 2 January 1975 
 
aim - to promote tourism as a means of contributing to economic 
development, international understanding, and peace 
 
members - (109) Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Austria, 
Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina, Burundi, 
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Cote 
d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, North Korea, South 
Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, 
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, 
Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, 
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and 
Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Sudan, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, UAE, 
US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Yugoslavia (suspended), Zaire, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
associate members-(4) Aruba, Macau, Netherlands Antilles, Puerto Rico 
  
observer-(1) Holy See 
 
----- 
 
Zangger Committee (ZC) 
 
established-early 1970s 
 
aim-to establish guidelines for the export control provisions of the 
nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
 
members-(29) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, 
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US

 
     Appendix D:  Abbreviations for Selected International Environmental  
                  Agreements 
 
A  Air Pollution 
     Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution 
   Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides 
     Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Nitrogen  
     Oxides Protocol) 
   Air Pollution-Sulphur 
     Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Sulphur  
     Protocol) 
   Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds 
     Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Volatile Organic  
     Compounds Protocol) 
   Antarctic-Environmental Protocol  
     Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 
 
B  Biodiversity 
     Convention on Biological Diversity 
 
C  Climate Change 
     United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
 
E  Endangered Species 
     Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of  
     Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) 
   Environmental Modification 
     Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of  
     Environmental Modification Techniques 
 
H  Hazardous Wastes 
     Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of  
     Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal 
 
L  Law of the Sea 
     United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS) 
 
M  Marine Dumping 
     Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and  
     Other Matter; note - also known as the London Convention 
   Marine Life Conservation 
     Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High  
     Seas 
 
N  Nuclear Test Ban 
     Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer  
     Space, and Under Water 
 
O  Ozone Layer Protection 
     Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer 
 
S  Ship Pollution 
     International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships  
     (MARPOL) 
 
T  Tropical Timber 
     International Tropical Timber Agreement 
 
W  Wetlands 
     Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As  
     Waterfowl Habitat; note - also known as Ramsar 
   Whaling 
     International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling 
 
Note:  Not all of the selected international environmental agreements have 
       abbreviations. 


6 April 1994 
 
Appendix E:  Selected International Environmental Agreements 
 
 
Air Pollution 
 
see Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution 

----- 

Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides 
 
see Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Nitrogen 
Oxides Protocol) 

----- 

Air Pollution-Sulphur 
 
see Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Sulphur 
Protocol) 

----- 

Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds 
 
see Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Volatile 
Organic Compounds Protocol) 
----- 
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol 
 
see Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty 

----- 

Antarctic Treaty 
 
date opened for signature - 1959 
 
objective - to ensure that Antarctica is used for peaceful purposes, 
for international cooperation in scientific research, and that it does 
not become the scene or object of international discord 
 
parties - (42) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, 
India, Italy, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Netherlands, New 
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, 
Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United 
Kingdom, United States, Uruguay 

----- 

Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous 
Wastes and Their Disposal 
 
note - abbreviated as Hazardous Wastes 
 
date opened for signature - 1989 
 
objective - to reduce transboundary movements of wastes subject to the 
Convention to a minimum consistent with the environmentally sound and 
efficient management of such wastes; to minimize the amount and 
toxicity of wastes generated and ensure their environmentally sound 
management as closely as possible to the source of generation; and to 
assist LDCs in environmentally sound management of the hazardous and 
other wastes they generate 
 
parties - (65) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, The 
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, 
European Union, Finland, France, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, South Korea, Kuwait, Latvia, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Monaco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, 
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Syria, Tanzania, Trinidad and Tobago, United Arab Emirates, United 
Kingdom, Uruguay 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Afghanistan, Bolivia, Colombia, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Haiti, Israel, Lebanon, New Zealand, Russia, Thailand, 
Turkey, United States, Venezuela 

----- 

Biodiversity 
 
see Convention on Biological Diversity 

----- 

Convention on Biological Diversity 
 
note - abbreviated as Biodiversity 
 
date opened for signature - 1992 
 
objective - to develop national strategies for the conservation and 
sustainable use of biological diversity 
 
parties - (53) Albania, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, The 
Bahamas, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Brazil, Burkina, Canada, China, 
Cook Islands, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, European Union, 
Fiji, Germany, Guinea, Hungary, India, Japan, Jordan, Malawi, Maldives, 
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal, 
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, 
Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Seychelles, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Sweden, Tunisia, Uganda, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zambia
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Austria, 
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, 
Botswana, Bulgaria, Burma, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central 
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El 
Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, 
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, 
Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, 
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, 
Malta, Mauritania, Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova, Morocco, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, 
Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, San Marino, 
Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon 
Islands, South Africa, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Switzerland, Syria, 
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, 
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Venezuela, 
Vietnam, Yemen, former Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zimbabwe 

----- 

Climate Change 
 
see United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 

----- 

Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High 
Seas 
 
note - abbreviated as Marine Life Conservation 
 
date opened for signature - 1958 
 
objective - to solve through international cooperation the problems 
involved in the conservation of living resources of the high seas, 
considering that through the development of modern techniques some of 
these resources are in danger of being over exploited 
 
parties - (37) Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina, 
Cambodia, Colombia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Finland, France, 
Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Netherlands, Nigeria, Portugal, Senegal, Sierra 
Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States, 
Venezuela, former Yugoslavia 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ghana, 
Iceland, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Nepal, New 
Zealand, Pakistan, Panama, Sri Lanka, Taiwan (Canada signed on behalf 
of Taiwan), Tunisia, Uruguay 

----- 

Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution 
 
note - abbreviated as Air Pollution 
 
date opened for signature - 1979 
 
objective - to protect the human environment against air pollution and 
to gradually reduce and prevent air pollution, including long-range 
transboundary air pollution 
 
parties - (38) Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, European 
Union, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, 
Italy, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, former 
Yugoslavia 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention: Holy See, San Marino 

----- 

Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Nitrogen Oxides 
Protocol) 
 
note - abbreviated as Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides 
 
date opened for signature - 1988 
 
objective - to provide for the control or reduction of nitrogen oxides 
and their transboundary fluxes 
 
parties - (23) Austria, Belarus, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Slovakia, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States   
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Belgium, Greece, Ireland, Poland, Spain 

----- 

Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Sulphur Protocol) 
 
note - abbreviated as Air Pollution-Sulphur 
 
date opened for signature - 1985; a second protocol to further reduce 
sulfur dioxide emissions was completed in 1994 
 
objective - to provide for a 30% reduction in sulfur emissions or 
transboundary fluxes by 1993 
 
parties - (21) Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Slovakia, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine 

----- 

Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (Volatile Organic 
Compounds Protocol) 
 
note - abbreviated as Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds  
 
date opened for signature - 1991, but not yet in force 
 
objective - to provide for the control and reduction of emissions of 
Volatile Organic Compounds in order to reduce their transboundary 
fluxes so as to protect human health and the environment from adverse 
effects 
 
parties - (8) Finland, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Denmark, European 
Union, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, Ukraine, 
United Kingdom, United States 

----- 

Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild 
Flora and Fauna (CITES) 
 
note - abbreviated as Endangered Species 
 
date opened for signature - 1973 
 
objective - to protect certain endangered species from overexploitation 
by means of a system of import/export permits 
 
parties - (104) Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Burkina, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, 
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, 
Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, 
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, 
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, 
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United 
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela, 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe        
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Cambodia, Ireland, Kuwait, Lesotho, Vietnam 

----- 

Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and 
Other Matter (London Convention)  
 
note - abbreviated as Marine Dumping 
 
date opened for signature - 1972 
 
objective - to control pollution of the sea by dumping, and to 
encourage regional agreements supplementary to the Convention 
 
parties - (70) Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belarus, Belgium, 
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, 
Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, European Union, 
Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, 
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, 
Kiribati, Libya, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Nauru, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New 
Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Saint Lucia, Seychelles, 
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, 
United States, Vanuatu, former Yugoslavia, Zaire 

----- 

Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of 
Environmental Modification Techniques 
 
note - abbreviated as Environmental Modification 
 
date opened for signature - 1976 
 
objective - to prohibit the military or other hostile use of 
environmental modification techniques in order to further world peace 
and trust among nations  
 
parties - (62) Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, 
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Dominica, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, 
India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Laos, 
Malawi, Mauritius, Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, 
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Romania, Russia, Saint Lucia, Sao 
Tome and Principe, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, 
Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Yemen 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Bolivia, Ethiopia, Holy See, Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, 
Liberia, Luxembourg, Morocco, Nicaragua, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Syria, 
Turkey, Uganda, Zaire 

----- 

Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As 
Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar) 
 
note - abbreviated as Wetlands 
 
date opened for signature - 1971 
 
objective - to stem the progressive encroachment on and loss of 
wetlands now and in the future, recognizing the fundamental ecological 
functions of wetlands and their economic, cultural, scientific, and 
recreational value 
 
parties - (65) Algeria, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Bulgaria, 
Burkina, Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Denmark, 
Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran, Ireland, 
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Mali, Malta, 
Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, 
Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Senegal, South 
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
Uganda, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, 
former Yugoslavia, Zambia 

----- 

Endangered Species 
 
see Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild 
Flora and Fauna (CITES) 

----- 

Environmental Modification 
 
see Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use 
of Environmental Modification Techniques 

----- 

Hazardous Wastes 
 
see Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of 
Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal 

----- 

International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships  
(MARPOL) 
 
note - abbreviated as Ship Pollution 
 
date opened for signature - 1973/78 
 
objective - to preserve the marine environment by achieving the 
complete elimination of pollution by oil and other harmful substances 
and the minimization of accidental discharge of such substances 
 
parties - (83) Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, 
Austria, The Bahamas, Belgium, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burma, Canada, 
China, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, 
Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, 
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Latvia, 
Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, 
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New 
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, 
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, 
Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Vietnam, 
former Yugoslavia 

----- 

International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling 
 
note - abbreviated as Whaling 
 
date opened for signature - 1946 
 
objective - to protect all species of whales from overfishing and 
safeguard for future generations the great natural resources 
represented by whale stocks; to establish a system of international 
regulation for the whale fisheries to ensure proper conservation and 
development of whale stocks 
 
parties - (39) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Belize, 
Brazil,  Chile, China, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, 
Germany, India, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, South Korea, Mauritius, Mexico, 
Monaco, Netherlands, Netherlands Antilles, New Zealand, Norway, Oman,  
Peru, Philippines, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, 
Senegal, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States 

----- 

International Tropical Timber Agreement 
 
note - abbreviated as Tropical Timber 
 
date opened for signature - 1983; a new agreement was opened for 
signature in 1994, but is not yet in force 
 
objective - to provide an effective framework for cooperation between 
tropical timber producers and consumers and to encourage the 
development of national policies aimed at sustainable utilization and 
conservation of tropical forests and their genetic resources 
 
parties - (45) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Burma, Cameroon, Canada, 
China, Colombia, Congo, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, 
Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Ireland, 
Italy, Japan, South Korea, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Nepal, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Portugal, 
Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and 
Tobago, United Kingdom, United States, Zaire  
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
agreement:  Bolivia, Brazil, Cote d'Ivoire, European Union, Honduras, 
Peru, Philippines 

----- 

Law of the Sea 
 
see United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS) 

----- 

Marine Dumping 
 
see Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes 
and Other Matter (London Convention) 

----- 

Marine Life Conservation 
 
see Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the 
High Seas  
----- 
Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer 
 
note - abbreviated as Ozone Layer Protection 
 
date opened for signature - 1987 
 
objective - to protect the ozone layer by taking precautionary measures 
to control emissions of substances that deplete it 
 
parties - (136) Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, 
Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, 
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, 
Burkina, Burma, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, 
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, 
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, 
El Salvador, European Union, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, 
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, 
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, 
Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Macau, Malawi, Malaysia, 
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Namibia, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, 
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, 
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, 
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, 
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab 
Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, 
Venezuela, Vietnam, Zambia 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
protocol:  Congo, Morocco 

----- 

Nuclear Test Ban 
 
see Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer 
Space, and Under Water 

----- 

Ozone Layer Protection 
 
see Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer 

----- 

Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty  
 
note - abbreviated as Antarctic-Environmental Protocol 
 
date opened for signature - 1991, but not yet in force  
 
objective - to enhance the protection of the Antarctic environment and 
dependent and associated ecosystems 
 
parties - (9) Argentina, Australia, Ecuador, France, Netherlands, 
Norway, Peru, Spain, Sweden 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
protocol:  Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, New 
Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, South 
Africa, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay   

----- 

Ship Pollution 
 
see International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution From Ships 
(MARPOL) 

----- 

Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, 
and Under Water 
 
note - abbreviated as Nuclear Test Ban  
 
date opened for signature - 1963 
 
objective - to obtain an agreement on general and complete disarmament 
under strict international control in accordance with the objectives of 
the United Nations; to put an end to the armaments race and eliminate 
incentives for the production and testing of all kinds of weapons, 
including nuclear weapons 
 
parties - (112) Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, 
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, 
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, 
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, 
Fiji, Finland, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, 
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, 
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, South 
Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, 
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Romania, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, 
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay, 
Venezuela, former Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia   
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
treaty:  Algeria, Burkina, Burundi, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Haiti, Mali, 
Paraguay, Portugal, Somalia, Vietnam 

----- 

Tropical Timber 
 
see International Tropical Timber Agreement 

----- 

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS) 
 
note - abbreviated as Law of the Sea 
 
date opened for signature - 1982, but not yet in force 
 
objective - to set up a comprehensive new legal regime for the sea and 
oceans and, as far as environmental provisions are concerned, to 
establish material rules concerning environmental standards as well as 
enforcement provisions dealing with pollution of the marine environment 
 
parties - (60) Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Bahrain, 
Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brazil, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Costa Rica, 
Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Djibouti, Dominica, Egypt, 
Fiji, The Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, 
Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Mali, 
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, 
Namibia, Nigeria, Oman, Paraguay, Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, 
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, 
Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Trinidad 
and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Yemen, former Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brunei, Bulgaria, 
Burkina, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, 
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Cook Islands, Denmark, 
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, European 
Union, Finland, France, Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary, 
India, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Laos, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Niger, Niue, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, 
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sierra 
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tuvalu, Ukraine, 
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Vietnam, Western Samoa 

----- 

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
 
note - abbreviated as Climate Change 
 
date opened for signature - 1992 
 
objective-to achieve stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in 
the atmosphere at a low enough level to prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system    
 
parties - (64) Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, 
Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Barbados, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina, 
Canada, China, Cook Islands, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, 
Ecuador, European Union, Fiji, France, Germany, Guinea, Hungary, 
Iceland, India, Japan, Jordan, South Korea, Maldives, Malta, Marshall 
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New 
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, 
Seychelles, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
Tuvulu, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, 
Zambia, Zimbabwe 
 
note - the following countries have signed, but not yet ratified the 
convention:  Afghanistan, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, 
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Burma, 
Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, 
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, 
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, 
Finland, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Iran,  Ireland, Israel, 
Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, North Korea, Latvia, 
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, 
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Moldova, Morocco, Mozambique, 
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, 
Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and 
Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon 
Islands, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, 
Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Western 
Samoa, Yemen, former Yugoslavia, Zaire    

----- 

Wetlands 
 
see Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As 
Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar) 

----- 

Whaling 
see International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling


Appendix F:  Weights and Measures 
 
Mathematical Notation 
  
Mathematical Power                             Name 
10^18 or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000             one quintillion 
10^15 or 1,000,000,000,000,000                 one quadrillion 
10^12 or 1,000,000,000,000                     one trillion 
10^9 or 1,000,000,000                          one billion 
10^6 or 1,000,000                              one million 
10^3 or 1,000                                  one thousand 
10^2 or 100                                    one hundred 
10^1 or 10                                     ten 
10^0 or 1                                      one 
10-^1 or 0.1                                   one-tenth 
10-^2 or 0.01                                  one-hundredth 
10-^3 or 0.001                                 one-thousandth 
10-^6 or 0.000 001                             one-millionth 
10-^9 or 0.000 000 001                         one-billionth 
10-^12 or 0.000 000 000 001                    one-trillionth 
10-^15 or 0.000 000 000 000 001                one-quadrillionth 
10-^18 or 0.000 000 000 000 000 00             one-quintillionth 
 
Metric Interrelationships 
 
Conversions from a multiple or submultiple to the basic units of meters, 
liters, or grams can be done using the table.  For example, to convert from 
kilometers to meters, multiply by 1,000 (9.26 kilometers equals 9,260 
meters) or to convert from meters to kilometers, multiply by 0.001 (9,260 
meters equals 9.26 kilometers). 
 
Prefix      Symbol         Length, weight,   
                           or capacity         Area         Volume 
exa         E              10^18               10^36        10^54 
peta        P              10^15               10^30        10^45 
tera        T              10^12               10^24        10^36 
giga        G              10^9                10^18        10^27 
mega        M              10^6                10^12        10^18 
hectokilo   hk             10^5                10^10        10^15 
myria       ma             10^4                10^8         10^12 
kilo        k              10^3                10^6         10^9 
hecto       h              10^2                10^4         10^6 
basic unit  -              1 meter,            1 meter^2    1 meter^3 
                           1 gram, 
                           1 liter 
deci        d              10-^1               10-^2        10-^3 
centi       c              10-^2               10-^4        10-^6 
milli       m              10-^3               10-^6        10-^9 
decimilli   dm             10-^4               10-^8        10-^12 
centimilli  cm             10-^5               10-^10       10-^15 
micro       u              10-^6               10-^12       10-^18 
nano        n              10-^9               10-^18       10-^27 
pico        p              10-^12              10-^24       10-^36 
femto       f              10-^15              10-^30       10-^45 
atto        a              10-^18              10-^36       10-^54 
 
Equivalents 
                       
Units                  Metric Equivalent        US Equivalent 
                               
acre                   0.404 685 64 hectares    43,560 feet^2 
acre                   4,046,856 4 meters^2     4,840 yards^2 
acre                   0.004 046 856 4          0.001 562 5 miles^2, 
                         kilometers^2             statute 
are                    100 meters^2             119.599 yards^2 
barrel  
 (petroleum, US)       158.987 29 liters        42 gallons 
 (proof spirits, US)   151.416 47 liters        40 gallons 
 (beer, US)            117.347 77 liters        31 gallons 
bushel                 35.239 07 liters         4 pecks 
cable                  219.456 meters           120 fathoms 
chain (surveyor's)     20.116 8 meters          66 feet 
cord (wood)            3.624 556 meters^3       128 feet^3 
cup                    0.236 588 2 liters       8 ounces, liquid (US) 
degrees, Celsius       (water boils at 100      multiply by 1.8 and add 32  
                        degrees C, freezes at   to obtain degrees F 
                        0 degrees C)                                                            
degrees, Fahrenheit    subtract 32 and divide   water boils at 212 degrees                               
                        by 1.8 to obtain        F, freezes at 32 degrees F)  
                        degrees C 
dram, avdp.            1.771 845 2 grams        0.0625 5 ounces, avdp. 
dram, troy             3.887 934 6 grams        0.125 ounces, troy 
dram, liquid  (US)     3.696 69 milliliters     0.125 ounces, liquid 
fathom                 1.828 8 meters           6 feet 
foot                   30.48 centimeters        12 inches 
foot                   0.304 8 meters           0.333 333 3 yards 
foot                   0.000 304 8 kilometers   0.000 189 39 miles, statute 
foot^2                 929.030 4 centimeters^2  144 inches^2 
foot^2                 0.092 903 04 meters^2    0.111 111 1 yards^2 
foot^3                 28.316 846 592 liters    7.480 519 gallons 
foot^3                 0.028 316 847 meters^3   1,728 inches^3 
furlong                201.168 meters           220 yards 
gallon, liquid (US)    3.785 411 784 liters     4 quarts, liquid 
gill (US)              118.294 118 milliliters  4 ounces, liquid 
grain                  64.798 91 milligrams     0.002 285 71 ounces, advp. 
gram                   1,000 milligrams         0.035 273 96 ounces, advp. 
hand (height of horse) 10.16 centimeters        4 inches 
hectare                10,000 meters^2          2.471 053 8 acres 
hundredweight, long    50.802 345 kilograms     112 pounds, avdp. 
hundredweight, short   45.359 237 kilograms     100 pounds, avdp. 
inch                   2.54 centimeters         0.083 333 33 feet 
inch^2                 6.451 6 centimeters^2    0.006 944 44 feet^2 
inch^3                 16.387 064 centimeters^3 0.000 578 7 feet^3 
inch^3                 16.387 064 milliliters   0.029 761 6 pints, dry 
inch^3                 16.387 064 milliliters   0.034 632 0 pints, liquid 
kilogram               0.001 tons, metric       2.204 623 pounds, avdp. 
kilometer              1,000 meters             0.621 371 19 miles, statute 
kilometer^2            100 hectares             247.105 38 acres 
kilometer^2            1,000,000 meters^2       0.386 102 16 miles^2, 
                                                  statute  
knot (1 nautical 
  mi/hr)               1.852 kilometers/hour    1.151 statute miles/hour         
league, nautical       5.559 552 kilometers     3 miles, nautical 
league, statute        4.828.032 kilometers     3 miles, statute  
link (surveyor's)      20.116 8 centimeters     7.92 inches  
liter                  0.001 meters^3           61.023 74 inches^3 
liter                  0.1 dekaliter            0.908 083 quarts, dry 
liter                  1,000 milliliters        1.056 688 quarts, liquid  
meter                  100 centimeters          1.093 613 yards 
meter^2                10,000 centimeters^2     1.195 990 yards^2 
meter^3                1,000 liters             1.307 951 yards^3 
micron                 0.000 001 meter          0.000 039 4 inches 
mil                    0.025 4 millimeters      0.001 inch 
mile, nautical         1.852 kilometers         1.150 779 4 miles, statute 
mile^2, nautical       3.429 904 kilometers^2   1.325 miles^2, statute 
mile, statute          1.609 344 kilometers     5,280 feet or 8 furlongs 
mile^2, statute        258.998 811 hectares     640 acres or 1 section 
mile^2, statute        2.589 988 11   
                         kilometers^2           0.755 miles^2, nautical          
minim (US)             0.061 611 52 milliliters 0.002 083 33 ounces, liquid 
                                                  or one-sixtieth of a dram 
ounce, avdp.           28.349 523 125 grams     437.5 grains 
ounce, liquid (US)     29.573 53 milliliters    0.062 5 pints, liquid 
ounce, troy            31.103 476 8 grams       480 grains 
pace                   76.2 centimeters         30 inches 
peck                   8.809 767 5 liters       8 quarts, dry 
pennyweight            1.555 173 84 grams       24 grains 
pint, dry (US)         0.550 610 47 liters      0.5 quarts, dry 
pint, liquid (US)      0.473 176 473 liters     0.5 quarts, liquid 
point (typographical)  0.351 459 8 millimeters  0.013 837 inches 
pound, avdp            453.592 37 grams         16 ounces, avdp 
pound, troy            373.241 721 6 grams      12 ounces, troy 
quart, dry (US)        1.101 221 liters         2 pints, dry 
quart, liquid (US)     0.946 352 946 liters     2 pints, liquid 
quintal                100 kilograms            220.462 26 pounds, avdp. 
rod                    5.029 2 meters           5.5 yards 
scruple                1.295 978 2 grams        20 grains 
section (US)           2.589 988 1 kilometers^2 1 mile^2, statute  
                                                  or 640 acres 
span                   22.86 centimeters        9 inches 
stere                  1 meter^3                1.307 95 yards^3 
tablespoon             14.786 76 milliliters    3 teaspoons 
teaspoon               4.928 922 milliliters    0.333 333 tablespoons 
ton, long or    
  deadweight           1,016.046 909 kilograms  2,240 pounds, avdp. 
ton, metric            1,000 kilograms          2,204.623 pounds, avdp. 
ton, metric            1,000 kilograms          32,150.75 ounces, troy 
ton, register          2.831 684 7 meters^3     100 feet^3 
ton, short             907.184 74 kilograms     2,000 pounds, avdp. 
township (US)          93.239 572 kilometers^2  36 miles^2, statute 
yard                   0.914 4 meters           3 feet 
yard^2                 0.836 127 36 meters^2    9 feet^2 
yard^3                 0.764 554 86 meters^3    27 feet^3 
yard^3                 764.554 857 984 liters   201.974 gallons 



Appendix G: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names 
 
This list indicates where various names, including all United States 
Foreign Service Posts, alternate names, former names, and political or 
geographical portions of larger entities, can be found in The World Fact-
book. Spellings are not necessarily those approved by the United States 
Board on Geographic Names (BGN). Alternate names are included in 
parentheses; additional information is included in brackets. 
 
Name                                  Entry in The World Factbook 
 
A 
Abidjan [US Embassy]                  Cote d'Ivoire 
 
Abu Dhabi [US Embassy]                United Arab Emirates 
 
Abuja [US Embassy Branch Office]      Nigeria 
 
Acapulco [US Consular Agency]         Mexico 
 
Accra [US Embassy]                    Ghana 
 
Adamstown                             Pitcairn Islands 
 
Adana [US Consulate]                  Turkey 
 
Addis Ababa [US Embassy]              Ethiopia 
 
Adelie Land (Terre Adelie)            Antarctica 
  [claimed by France] 
 
Aden                                  Yemen 
 
Aden, Gulf of                         Indian Ocean 
 
Admiralty Islands                     Papua New Guinea 
 
Adriatic Sea                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Aegean Islands                        Greece 
 
Aegean Sea                            Atlantic Ocean 
 
Afars and Issas, French Territory     Djibouti 
  of the (F.T.A.I.)  
 
Agalega Islands                       Mauritius 
 
Agana                                 Guam 
 
Aland Islands                         Finland 
 
Alaska                                United States 
 
Alaska, Gulf of                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Aldabra Islands                       Seychelles 
 
Alderney                              Guernsey 
 
Aleutian Islands                      United States 
 
Alexander Island                      Antarctica 
 
Alexandria [US Consulate General      Egypt 
  closed in September 1993] 
 
Algiers [US Embassy]                  Algeria 
 
Alhucemas, Penon de                   Spain 
 
Alma-Ata (see Almaty)                 Kazakhstan 
 
Almaty (Alma-Ata) [US Embassy]        Kazakhstan 
 
Alofi                                 Niue 
 
Alphonse Island                       Seychelles 
 
Amami Strait                          Pacific Ocean 
 
Amindivi Islands                      India 
 
Amirante Isles                        Seychelles 
 
Amman [US Embassy]                    Jordan 
 
Amsterdam [US Consulate General]      Netherlands 
 
Amsterdam Island (Ile Amsterdam)      French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
 
Amundsen Sea                          Pacific Ocean 
 
Amur                                  China; Russia 
 
Andaman Islands                       India 
 
Andaman Sea                           Indian Ocean 
 
Andorra la Vella                      Andorra 
 
Anegada Passage                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan                  Sudan 
 
Anjouan                               Comoros 
 
Ankara [US Embassy]                   Turkey 
 
Annobon                               Equatorial Guinea 
 
Antananarivo [US Embassy]             Madagascar 
 
Antipodes Islands                     New Zealand 
 
Antwerp [European Logistical          Belgium 
  Support Office] 
 
Aozou Strip                           Chad 
 
Apia [US Embassy]                     Western Samoa 
 
Aqaba, Gulf of                        Indian Ocean 
 
Arabian Sea                           Indian Ocean 
 
Arafura Sea                           Pacific Ocean 
 
Argun                                 China; Russia 
 
Ascension Island                      Saint Helena 
 
Ashgabat [US Embassy]                 Turkmenistan 
 
Ashkhabad (see Ashgabat)              Turkmenistan 
 
Asmara [US Embassy]                   Eritrea 
 
Asmera (see Asmara)                   Eritrea 
 
Assumption Island                     Seychelles 
 
Asuncion [US Embassy]                 Paraguay 
 
Asuncion Island                       Northern Mariana Islands 
 
Atacama                               Chile 
 
Athens [US Embassy]                   Greece 
 
Attu                                  United States 
 
Auckland [US Consulate General]       New Zealand 
 
Auckland Islands                      New Zealand 
 
Australes Iles (Iles Tubuai)          French Polynesia 
 
Avarua                                Cook Islands 
 
Axel Heiberg Island                   Canada 
 
Azores                                Portugal 
 
Azov, Sea of                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
B 
Bab el Mandeb                         Indian Ocean 
 
Babuyan Channel                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Babuyan Islands                       Philippines 
 
Baffin Bay                            Arctic Ocean 
 
Baffin Island                         Canada 
 
Baghdad [US Embassy temporarily       Iraq 
  suspended; US Interests Section 
  located in Poland's embassy in 
  Baghdad] 
 
Baku [US Embassy]                     Azerbaijan 
 
Baky (Baku)                           Azerbaijan 
 
Balabac Strait                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Balearic Islands                      Spain 
 
Balearic Sea (Iberian Sea)            Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bali Sea                              Indian Ocean 
 
Balintang Channel                     Pacific Ocean 
 
Balintang Islands                     Philippines 
 
Balleny Islands                       Antarctica 
 
Balochistan                           Pakistan 
 
Baltic Sea                            Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bamako [US Embassy]                   Mali 
 
Banaba (Ocean Island)                 Kiribati 
 
Bandar Seri Begawan [US Embassy]      Brunei 
 
Banda Sea                             Pacific Ocean 
 
Bangkok [US Embassy]                  Thailand 
 
Bangui [US Embassy]                   Central African Republic 
 
Banjul [US Embassy]                   Gambia, The 
 
Banks Island                          Canada 
 
Banks Islands (Iles Banks)            Vanuatu 
 
Barcelona [US Consulate General]      Spain 
 
Barents Sea                           Arctic Ocean 
 
Barranquilla [US Consulate]           Colombia 
 
Bashi Channel                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Basilan Strait                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Bass Strait                           Pacific Ocean 
 
Basse-Terre                           Guadeloupe 
 
Basseterre                            Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 
Batan Islands                         Philippines 
 
Basutoland                            Lesotho 
 
Bavaria (Bayern)                      Germany 
 
Beagle Channel                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bear Island (Bjornoya)                Svalbard 
 
Beaufort Sea                          Arctic Ocean 
 
Bechuanaland                          Botswana 
 
Beijing [US Embassy]                  China 
 
Beirut [US Embassy]                   Lebanon 
 
Belau (see Palu)                      Pacific Islands, 
                                         Trust Territory of the 
 
Belem [US Consular Agency]            Brazil 
 
Belep Islands (Iles Belep)            New Caledonia 
 
Belfast [US Consulate General]        United Kingdom 
 
Belgian Congo                         Zaire 
 
Belgrade [US Embassy; US does not     Serbia and Montenegro 
  maintain full diplomatic relations 
  with Serbia and Montenegro] 
 
Belize City [US Embassy]              Belize 
 
Belle Isle, Strait of                 Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bellingshausen Sea                    Pacific Ocean 
 
Belmopan                              Belize 
 
Belorussia                            Belarus 
 
Bengal, Bay of                        Indian Ocean 
 
Bering Sea                            Pacific Ocean 
 
Bering Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Berkner Island                        Antarctica 
 
Berlin [US Branch Office]             Germany 
 
Berlin, East                          Germany 
 
Berlin, West                          Germany 
 
Bern [US Embassy]                     Switzerland 
 
Bessarabia                            Romania; Moldova 
 
Bijagos, Arquipelago dos              Guinea-Bissau 
 
Bikini Atoll                          Marshall Islands 
 
Bilbao [US Consulate]                 Spain 
 
Bioko                                 Equatorial Guinea 
 
Biscay, Bay of                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bishkek [US Embassy]                  Kyrgyzstan 
 
Bishop Rock                           United Kingdom 
 
Bismarck Archipelago                  Papua New Guinea 
 
Bismarck Sea                          Pacific Ocean 
 
Bissau [US Embassy]                   Guinea-Bissau 
 
Bjornoya (Bear Island)                Svalbard 
 
Black Rock                            Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
 
Black Sea                             Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bloemfontein                          South Africa 
 
Boa Vista                             Cape Verde 
 
Bogota [US Embassy]                   Colombia 
 
Bombay [US Consulate General]         India 
 
Bonaire                               Netherlands Antilles 
 
Bonifacio, Strait of                  Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bonin Islands                         Japan 
 
Bonn [US Embassy]                     Germany 
 
Bophuthatswana                        South Africa 
 
Bora-Bora                             French Polynesia 
 
Bordeaux [US Consulate General]       France 
 
Borneo                                Brunei; Indonesia; Malaysia 
 
Bornholm                              Denmark 
 
Bosporus                              Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bothnia, Gulf of                      Atlantic Ocean 
 
Bougainville Island                   Papua New Guinea 
 
Bougainville Strait                   Pacific Ocean 
 
Bounty Islands                        New Zealand 
 
Brasilia [US Embassy]                 Brazil 
 
Bratislava [US Embassy]               Slovakia 
 
Brazzaville [US Embassy]              Congo 
 
Bridgetown [US Embassy]               Barbados 
 
Brisbane [US Consulate]               Australia 
 
British East Africa                   Kenya 
 
British Guiana                        Guyana 
 
British Honduras                      Belize 
 
British Solomon Islands               Solomon Islands 
 
British Somaliland                    Somalia 
 
Brussels [US Embassy, US Mission      Belgium 
  to European Union, US Mission to 
  the North Atlantic Treaty 
  Organization (USNATO)] 
 
Bucharest [US Embassy]                Romania 
 
Budapest [US Embassy]                 Hungary 
 
Buenos Aires [US Embassy]             Argentina 
 
Bujumbura [US Embassy]                Burundi 
 
Burnt Pine                            Norfolk Island 
 
Byelorussia                           Belarus 
 
C 
Cabinda                               Angola 
 
Cabot Strait                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Caicos Islands                        Turks and Caicos Islands 
 
Cairo [US Embassy]                    Egypt 
 
Calcutta [US Consulate General]       India 
 
Calgary [US Consulate General]        Canada 
 
California, Gulf of                   Pacific Ocean 
 
Campbell Island                       New Zealand 
 
Canal Zone                            Panama 
 
Canary Islands                        Spain 
 
Canberra [US Embassy]                 Australia 
 
Canton (Guangzhou)                    China 
 
Canton Island                         Kiribati 
 
Cape Town [US Consulate General]      South Africa 
 
Caracas [US Embassy]                  Venezuela 
 
Cargados Carajos Shoals               Mauritius 
 
Caroline Islands                      Micronesia, Federated States of; 
                                        Pacific Islands, Trust Territory                  
                                        of the 
 
Caribbean Sea                         Atlantic Ocean 
 
Carpentaria, Gulf of                  Pacific Ocean 
 
Casablanca [US Consulate General]     Morocco 
 
Castries                              Saint Lucia 
 
Cato Island                           Australia 
 
Cayenne                               French Guiana 
 
Cebu [US Consulate General]           Philippines 
 
Celebes                               Indonesia 
 
Celebes Sea                           Pacific Ocean 
 
Celtic Sea                            Atlantic Ocean 
 
Central African Empire                Central African Republic 
 
Ceuta                                 Spain 
 
Ceylon                                Sri Lanka 
 
Chafarinas, Islas                     Spain 
 
Chagos Archipelago (Oil Islands)      British Indian Ocean Territory 
 
Channel Islands                       Guernsey; Jersey 
 
Charlotte Amalie                      Virgin Islands 
 
Chatham Islands                       New Zealand 
 
Cheju-do                              Korea, South 
 
Cheju Strait                          Pacific Ocean 
 
Chengdu [US Consulate General]        China 
 
Chesterfield Islands                  New Caledonia 
  (Iles Chesterfield)  
 
Chiang Mai [US Consulate General]     Thailand 
 
Chihli, Gulf of (see Bo Hai)          Pacific Ocean 
 
China, People's Republic of           China 
 
China, Republic of                    Taiwan 
 
Chisinau [US Embassy]                 Moldova 
 
Choiseul                              Solomon Islands 
 
Christmas Island [Indian Ocean]       Australia 
 
Christmas Island [Pacific Ocean]      Kiribati 
  (Kiritimati) 
 
Chukchi Sea                           Arctic Ocean 
 
Ciskei                                South Africa 
 
Ciudad Juarez [US Consulate General]  Mexico 
 
Coco, Isla del                        Costa Rica 
 
Cocos Islands                         Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 
Colombo [US Embassy]                  Sri Lanka 
 
Colon, Archipielago de                Ecuador 
  (Galapagos Islands) 
 
Commander Islands                     Russia 
  (Komandorskiye Ostrova) 
 
Conakry [US Embassy]                  Guinea 
 
Congo (Brazzaville)                   Congo 
 
Congo (Kinshasa)                      Zaire 
 
Congo (Leopoldville)                  Zaire 
 
Con Son Islands                       Vietnam 
 
Cook Strait                           Pacific Ocean 
 
Copenhagen [US Embassy]               Denmark 
 
Coral Sea                             Pacific Ocean 
 
Corn Islands (Islas del Maiz)         Nicaragua 
 
Corsica                               France 
 
Cosmoledo Group                       Seychelles 
 
Cotonou [US Embassy]                  Benin 
 
Crete                                 Greece 
 
Crooked Island Passage                Atlantic Ocean 
 
Crozet Islands (Iles Crozet)          French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
 
Curacao [US Consulate General]        Netherlands Antilles 
 
Czechoslovakia                        Czech Republic; Slovakia 
 
D 
Dahomey                               Benin 
 
Daito Islands                         Japan 
 
Dakar [US Embassy]                    Senegal 
 
Daman (Damao)                         India 
 
Damascus [US Embassy]                 Syria 
 
Danger Atoll                          Cook Islands 
 
Danish Straits                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
Danzig (Gdansk)                       Poland 
 
Dao Bach Long Vi                      Vietnam 
 
Dardanelles                           Atlantic Ocean 
 
Dar es Salaam [US Embassy]            Tanzania 
 
Davis Strait                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Deception Island                      Antarctica 
 
Denmark Strait                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
D'Entrecasteaux Islands               Papua New Guinea 
 
Devon Island                          Canada 
 
Dhahran [US Consulate General]        Saudi Arabia 
 
Dhaka [US Embassy]                    Bangladesh 
 
Diego Garcia                          British Indian Ocean Territory 
 
Diego Ramirez                         Chile 
 
Diomede Islands                       Russia [Big Diomede]; United States  
                                        [Little Diomede] 
 
Diu                                   India 
 
Djibouti [US Embassy]                 Djibouti 
 
Dodecanese                            Greece 
 
Dodoma                                Tanzania 
 
Doha [US Embassy]                     Qatar 
 
Douala [US Consulate closed in        Cameroon 
  September 1993] 
 
Douglas                               Man, Isle of 
 
Dover, Strait of                      Atlantic Ocean 
 
Drake Passage                         Atlantic Ocean 
 
Dubai (see Dubayy)                    United Arab Emirates 
 
Dubayy [US Consulate General]         United Arab Emirates 
 
Dublin [US Embassy]                   Ireland 
 
Durban [US Consulate General]         South Africa 
 
Dushanbe [Embassy]                    Tajikistan 
 
Dutch East Indies                     Indonesia 
 
Dutch Guiana                          Suriname 
 
E 
East China Sea                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Easter Island (Isla de Pascua)        Chile 
 
Eastern Channel (East Korea Strait    Pacific Ocean 
  or Tsushima Strait) 
 
East Germany (German Democratic       Germany 
  Republic) 
 
East Korea Strait (Eastern Channel    Pacific Ocean 
  or Tsushima Strait) 
 
East Pakistan                         Bangladesh 
 
East Siberian Sea                     Arctic Ocean 
 
East Timor (Portuguese Timor)         Indonesia 
 
Edinburgh [US Consulate General]      United Kingdom 
 
Elba                                  Italy 
 
Ellef Ringnes Island                  Canada 
 
Ellesmere Island                      Canada 
 
Ellice Islands                        Tuvalu 
 
Elobey, Islas de                      Equatorial Guinea 
 
Enderbury Island                      Kiribati 
 
Enewetak Atoll (Eniwetok Atoll)       Marshall Islands 
 
England                               United Kingdom 
 
English Channel                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Eniwetok Atoll                        Marshall Islands 
 
Epirus, Northern                      Albania; Greece 
 
Essequibo [claimed by Venezuela]      Guyana 
 
Etorofu                               Russia [de facto] 
 
F 
Farquhar Group                        Seychelles 
 
Fernando de Noronha                   Brazil 
 
Fernando Po (Bioko)                   Equatorial Guinea 
 
Finland, Gulf of                      Atlantic Ocean 
 
Florence [US Consulate General]       Italy 
 
Florida, Straits of                   Atlantic Ocean 
 
Formosa                               Taiwan 
 
Formosa Strait (Taiwan Strait)        Pacific Ocean 
 
Fortaleza [US Consular Agency]        Brazil 
 
Fort-de-France [US Consulate General] Martinique 
 
Frankfurt am Main [US                 Germany 
  Consulate General] 
 
Franz Josef Land                      Russia 
 
Freetown [US Embassy]                 Sierra Leone 
 
French Cameroon                       Cameroon 
 
French Indochina                      Cambodia; Laos; Vietnam 
 
French Guinea                         Guinea 
 
French Sudan                          Mali 
 
French Territory of the Afars         Djibouti 
  and Issas (F.T.A.I.) 
 
French Togo                           Togo 
 
Friendly Islands                      Tonga 
 
Frunze (Bishkek)                      Kyrgyzstan 
 
Fukuoka [US Consulate]                Japan 
 
Funafuti                              Tuvalu 
 
Fundy, Bay of                         Atlantic Ocean 
 
Futuna Islands (Hoorn Islands)        Wallis and Futuna 
 
G 
Gaborone [US Embassy]                 Botswana 
 
Galapagos Islands (Archipielago       Ecuador 
  de Colon) 
 
Galleons Passage                      Atlantic Ocean 
 
Gambier Islands (Iles Gambier)        French Polynesia 
 
Gaspar Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Geneva [Branch Office of the          Switzerland 
  US Embassy, US Mission to European 
  Office of the UN and Other 
  International Organizations] 
 
Genoa [US Consulate General closed    Italy 
  in June 1993] 
 
George Town [US Consular Agency]      Cayman Islands 
 
Georgetown [US Embassy]               Guyana 
 
German Democratic Republic            Germany 
  (East Germany) 
 
German Federal Republic of            Germany 
  (West Germany) 
 
Gibraltar, Strait of                  Atlantic Ocean 
 
Gilbert Islands                       Kiribati 
 
Goa                                   India 
 
Gold Coast                            Ghana 
 
Golan Heights                         Syria 
 
Good Hope, Cape of                    South Africa 
 
Goteborg                              Sweden 
 
Gotland                               Sweden 
 
Gough Island                          Saint Helena 
 
Grand Banks                           Atlantic Ocean 
 
Grand Cayman                          Cayman Islands 
 
Grand Turk [US Consular Agency]       Turks and Caicos Islands 
 
Great Australian Bight                Indian Ocean 
 
Great Belt (Store Baelt)              Atlantic Ocean 
 
Great Britain                         United Kingdom 
 
Great Channel                         Indian Ocean 
 
Greater Sunda Islands                 Brunei; Indonesia; Malaysia 
 
Green Islands                         Papua New Guinea 
 
Greenland Sea                         Arctic Ocean 
 
Grenadines, Northern                  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 
Grenadines, Southern                  Grenada 
 
Grytviken                             Georgia 
 
Guadalajara [US Consulate General]    Mexico 
 
Guadalcanal                           Solomon Islands 
 
Guadalupe, Isla de                    Mexico 
 
Guangzhou [US Consulate General]      China 
 
Guantanamo Bay [US Naval Base]        Cuba 
 
Guatemala [US Embassy]                Guatemala 
 
Gubal, Strait of                      Indian Ocean 
 
Guinea, Gulf of                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Guayaquil [US Consulate General]      Ecuador 
 
H 
Ha'apai Group                         Tonga 
 
Habomai Islands                       Russia [de facto] 
 
Hague, The [US Embassy]               Netherlands 
 
Hainan Dao                            China 
 
Halifax [US Consulate General]        Canada 
 
Halmahera                             Indonesia 
 
Hamburg [US Consulate General]        Germany 
 
Hamilton [US Consulate General]       Bermuda 
 
Hanoi                                 Vietnam 
 
Harare [US Embassy]                   Zimbabwe 
 
Hatay                                 Turkey 
 
Havana [US post not maintained;       Cuba 
  representation by US Interests 
  Section (USINT) of the Swiss 
  Embassy] 
 
Hawaii                                United States 
 
Heard Island                          Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
 
Helsinki [US Embassy]                 Finland 
 
Hermosillo [US Consulate]             Mexico 
 
Hispaniola                            Dominican Republic; Haiti 
 
Hokkaido                              Japan 
 
Hong Kong [US Consulate General]      Hong Kong 
 
Honiara [US Consulate]                Solomon Islands 
 
Honshu                                Japan 
 
Hormuz, Strait of                     Indian Ocean 
 
Horn, Cape (Cabo de Hornos)           Chile 
 
Horne, Iles de                        Wallis and Futuna 
 
Horn of Africa                        Ethiopia; Somalia 
 
Hudson Bay                            Arctic Ocean 
 
Hudson Strait                         Arctic Ocean 
 
I 
Inaccessible Island                   Saint Helena 
 
Indochina                             Cambodia; Laos; Vietnam 
 
Inner Mongolia (Nei Mongol)           China 
 
Ionian Islands                        Greece 
 
Ionian Sea                            Atlantic Ocean 
 
Irian Jaya                            Indonesia 
 
Irish Sea                             Atlantic Ocean 
 
Islamabad [US Embassy]                Pakistan 
 
Islas Malvinas                        Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
 
Istanbul [US Consulate General]       Turkey 
 
Italian Somaliland                    Somalia 
 
Ivory Coast                           Cote d'Ivoire 
 
Iwo Jima                              Japan 
 
J 
Jakarta [US Embassy]                  Indonesia 
 
Jamestown                             Saint Helena 
 
Japan, Sea of                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Java                                  Indonesia 
 
Java Sea                              Pacific Ocean 
 
Jeddah (see Jiddah)                   Saudi Arabia 
 
Jerusalem [US Consulate General]      Israel; West Bank 
 
Jiddah [US Consulate General]         Saudi Arabia 
 
Johannesburg [US Consulate General]   South Africa 
 
Juan de Fuca, Strait of               Pacific Ocean 
 
Juan Fernandez, Isla de               Chile 
 
Juventud, Isla de la (Isle of Youth)  Cuba 
 
K 
Kabul [US Embassy now closed]         Afghanistan 
 
Kaduna [US Consulate General]         Nigeria 
 
Kalimantan                            Indonesia 
 
Kamchatka Peninsula                   Russia 
  (Poluostrov Kamchatka) 
 
Kampala [US Embassy]                  Uganda 
 
Kampuchea                             Cambodia 
 
Karachi [US Consulate General]        Pakistan 
 
Kara Sea                              Arctic Ocean 
 
Karimata Strait                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Kathmandu [US Embassy]                Nepal 
 
Kattegat                              Atlantic Ocean 
 
Kauai Channel                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Keeling Islands                       Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 
Kerguelen, Iles                       French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
 
Kermadec Islands                      New Zealand 
 
Khabarovsk                            Russia 
 
Khartoum [US Embassy]                 Sudan 
 
Khmer Republic                        Cambodia 
 
Khuriya Muriya Islands (Kuria         Oman 
  Muria Islands) 
 
Khyber Pass                           Pakistan 
 
Kiel Canal (Nord-Ostsee Kanal)        Atlantic Ocean 
 
Kiev [US Embassy]                     Ukraine 
 
Kigali [US Embassy closed             Rwanda 
  indefinitely] 
 
Kingston [US Embassy]                 Jamaica 
 
Kingston                              Norfolk Island 
 
Kingstown                             Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 
Kinshasa [US Embassy]                 Zaire 
 
Kirghiziya                            Kyrgyzstan 
 
Kiritimati (Christmas Island)         Kiribati 
 
Kishinev (Chisinau)                   Moldova 
 
Kithira Strait                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
Kodiak Island                         United States 
 
Kola Peninsula (Kol'skiy Poluostrov)  Russia 
 
Kolonia [US Embassy]                  Micronesia, Federated States of 
 
Korea Bay                             Pacific Ocean 
 
Korea, Democratic People's            Korea, North 
  Republic of 
 
Korea, Republic of                    Korea, South 
 
Korea Strait                          Pacific Ocean 
 
Koror [US Liaison Office]             Pacific Islands, Trust Territory of 
 
Kosovo                                Serbia and Montenegro 
 
Kowloon                               Hong Kong 
 
Krakow [US Consulate General]         Poland 
 
Kuala Lumpur [US Embassy]             Malaysia 
 
Kunashiri (Kunashir)                  Russia [de facto] 
 
Kuril Islands                         Russia [de facto] 
 
Kuwait [US Embassy]                   Kuwait 
 
Kwajalein Atoll                       Marshall Islands 
 
Kyushu                                Japan 
 
Kyyiv (Kiev)                          Ukraine 
 
L 
Labrador                              Canada 
 
Laccadive Islands                     India 
 
Laccadive Sea                         Indian Ocean 
 
Lagos [US Embassy]                    Nigeria 
 
Lahore [US Consulate General]         Pakistan 
 
Lakshadweep                           India 
 
La Paz [US Embassy]                   Bolivia 
 
La Perouse Strait                     Pacific Ocean 
 
Laptev Sea                            Arctic Ocean 
 
Las Palmas [US Consular Agency]       Spain 
 
Lau Group                             Fiji 
 
Leipzig [US Consulate General]        Germany 
 
Leningrad (see Saint Petersburg)      Russia 
 
Lesser Sunda Islands                  Indonesia 
 
Leyte                                 Philippines 
 
Liancourt Rocks [claimed by Japan]    Korea, South 
 
Libreville [US Embassy]               Gabon 
 
Ligurian Sea                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Lilongwe [US Embassy]                 Malawi 
 
Lima [US Embassy]                     Peru 
 
Lincoln Sea                           Arctic Ocean 
 
Line Islands                          Kiribati; Palmyra Atoll 
 
Lisbon [US Embassy]                   Portugal 
 
Ljubljana [US Embassy]                Slovenia 
 
Lobamba                               Swaziland 
 
Lombok Strait                         Indian Ocean 
 
Lome [US Embassy]                     Togo 
 
London [US Embassy]                   United Kingdom 
 
Longyearbyen                          Svalbard 
 
Lord Howe Island                      Australia 
 
Louisiade Archipelago                 Papua New Guinea 
 
Loyalty Islands (Iles Loyaute)        New Caledonia 
 
Luanda [US Embassy]                   Angola 
 
Lusaka [US Embassy]                   Zambia 
 
Luxembourg [US Embassy]               Luxembourg 
 
Luzon                                 Philippines 
 
Luzon Strait                          Pacific Ocean 
 
M 
Macao                                 Macau 
 
Macedonia                             The Former Yugoslav Republic 
                                        of Macedonia 
 
Macquarie Island                      Australia 
 
Madeira Islands                       Portugal 
 
Madras [US Consulate General]         India 
 
Madrid [US Embassy]                   Spain 
 
Magellan, Strait of                   Atlantic Ocean 
 
Maghreb                               Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco,  
                                        Tunisia 
 
Mahe Island                           Seychelles 
 
Maiz, Islas del (Corn Islands)        Nicaragua 
 
Majorca (Mallorca)                    Spain 
 
Majuro [US Embassy]                   Marshall Islands 
 
Makassar Strait                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Malabo [US Embassy]                   Equatorial Guinea 
 
Malacca, Strait of                    Indian Ocean 
 
Malagasy Republic                     Madagascar 
 
Male [US Consular Agency]             Maldives 
 
Mallorca (Majorca)                    Spain 
 
Malpelo, Isla de                      Colombia 
 
Malta Channel                         Atlantic Ocean 
 
Malvinas, Islas                       Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
 
Mamoutzou                             Mayotte 
 
Managua [US Embassy]                  Nicaragua 
 
Manama [US Embassy]                   Bahrain 
 
Manaus [US Consular Agency]           Brazil 
 
Manchukuo                             China 
 
Manchuria                             China 
 
Manila [US Embassy]                   Philippines 
 
Manipa Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Mannar, Gulf of                       Indian Ocean 
 
Manua Islands                         American Samoa 
 
Maputo [US Embassy]                   Mozambique 
 
Marcus Island (Minami-tori-shima)     Japan 
 
Mariana Islands                       Guam; Northern Mariana Islands 
 
Marion Island                         South Africa 
 
Marmara, Sea of                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Marquesas Islands (Iles Marquises)    French Polynesia 
 
Marseille [US Consulate General]      France 
 
Martin Vaz, Ilhas                     Brazil 
 
Mas a Tierra (Robinson Crusoe         Chile 
  Island) 
 
Mascarene Islands                     Mauritius; Reunion 
 
Maseru [US Embassy]                   Lesotho 
 
Matamoros [US Consulate]              Mexico 
 
Mata-Utu                              Wallis and Futuna 
 
Mazatlan [US Consulate closed         Mexico 
  May 1993] 
 
Mbabane [US Embassy]                  Swaziland 
 
McDonald Islands                      Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
 
Medan [US Consulate]                  Indonesia 
 
Mediterranean Sea                     Atlantic Ocean 
 
Melbourne [US Consulate General]      Australia 
 
Melilla                               Spain 
 
Merida [US Consulate                  Mexico 
 
Messina, Strait of                    Atlantic Ocean 
 
Mexico [US Embassy]                   Mexico 
 
Mexico, Gulf of                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Milan [US Consulate General]          Italy 
 
Minami-tori-shima                     Japan 
 
Mindanao                              Philippines 
 
Mindoro Strait                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Minicoy Island                        India 
 
Minsk [US Embassy]                    Belarus 
 
Mogadishu [US Liaison Office]         Somalia 
 
Moldavia                              Moldova 
 
Mombasa [US Consulate closed          Kenya 
  May 1993] 
 
Mona Passage                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Monrovia [US Embassy]                 Liberia 
 
Montenegro                            Serbia and Montenegro 
 
Monterrey [US Consulate General]      Mexico 
 
Montevideo [US Embassy]               Uruguay 
 
Montreal [US Consulate General, US    Canada 
  Mission to the International Civil 
  Aviation Organization (ICAO)] 
 
Moravian Gate                         Czech Republic 
 
Moroni [US Embassy]                   Comoros 
 
Mortlock Islands                      Micronesia, Federated States of 
 
Moscow [US Embassy]                   Russia 
 
Mozambique Channel                    Indian Ocean 
 
Munich [US Consulate General]         Germany 
 
Musandam Peninsula                    Oman; United Arab Emirates 
 
Muscat [US Embassy]                   Oman 
 
Muscat and Oman                       Oman 
 
Myanma, Myanmar                       Burma 
 
N 
Naha [US Consulate General]           Japan 
 
Nairobi [US Embassy]                  Kenya 
 
Nampo-shoto                           Japan 
 
Naples [US Consulate General]         Italy 
 
Nassau [US Embassy]                   Bahamas, The 
 
Natuna Besar Islands                  Indonesia 
 
N'Djamena [US Embassy]                Chad 
 
Netherlands East Indies               Indonesia 
 
Netherlands Guiana                    Suriname 
 
Nevis                                 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 
New Delhi [US Embassy]                India 
 
Newfoundland                          Canada 
 
New Guinea                            Indonesia; Papua New Guinea 
 
New Hebrides                          Vanuatu 
 
New Siberian Islands                  Russia 
 
New Territories                       Hong Kong 
 
New York, New York [US Mission to     United States 
  the United Nations (USUN)] 
 
Niamey [US Embassy]                   Niger 
 
Nicobar Islands                       India 
 
Nicosia [US Embassy]                  Cyprus 
 
Nightingale Island                    Saint Helena 
 
North Atlantic Ocean                  Atlantic Ocean 
 
North Channel                         Atlantic Ocean 
 
Northeast Providence Channel          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Northern Epirus                       Albania; Greece 
 
Northern Grenadines                   Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 
Northern Ireland                      United Kingdom 
 
Northern Rhodesia                     Zambia 
 
North Island                          New Zealand 
 
North Korea                           Korea, North 
 
North Pacific Ocean                   Pacific Ocean 
 
North Sea                             Atlantic Ocean 
 
North Vietnam                         Vietnam 
 
Northwest Passages                    Arctic Ocean 
 
North Yemen (Yemen Arab Republic)     Yemen 
 
Norwegian Sea                         Atlantic Ocean 
 
Nouakchott [US Embassy]               Mauritania 
 
Noumea                                New Caledonia 
 
Novaya Zemlya                         Russia 
 
Nuku'alofa                            Tonga 
 
Nuevo Laredo [US Consulate]           Mexico 
 
Nuuk (Godthab)                        Greenland 
 
Nyasaland                             Malawi 
 
O 
Oahu                                  United States 
 
Ocean Island (Banaba)                 Kiribati 
 
Ocean Island (Kure Island)            United States 
 
Ogaden                                Ethiopia; Somalia 
 
Oil Islands (Chagos Archipelago)      British Indian Ocean Territory 
 
Okhotsk, Sea of                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Okinawa                               Japan 
 
Oman, Gulf of                         Indian Ocean 
 
Ombai Strait                          Pacific Ocean 
 
Oran [US Consulate]                   Algeria 
 
Oranjestad                            Aruba 
 
Oresund (The Sound)                   Atlantic Ocean 
 
Orkney Islands                        United Kingdom 
 
Osaka-Kobe [US Consulate General]     Japan 
 
Oslo [US Embassy]                     Norway 
 
Otranto, Strait of                    Atlantic Ocean 
 
Ottawa [US Embassy]                   Canada 
 
Ouagadougou [US Embassy]              Burkina 
 
Outer Mongolia                        Mongolia 
 
P 
Pagan                                 Northern Mariana Islands 
 
Pago Pago                             American Samoa 
 
Palau                                 Pacific Islands, Trust Territory 
                                        of the 
 
Palawan                               Philippines 
 
Palermo [US Consulate General]        Italy 
 
Palk Strait                           Indian Ocean 
 
Pamirs                                China; Tajikistan 
 
Panama [US Embassy]                   Panama 
 
Panama Canal                          Panama 
 
Panama, Gulf of                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Papeete                               French Polynesia 
 
Paramaribo [US Embassy]               Suriname 
 
Parece Vela                           Japan 
 
Paris [US Embassy, US Mission to the  France 
  Organization for Economic 
  Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
  US Observer Mission at the UN 
  Educational, Scientific, and 
  Cultural Organization (UNESCO)]   
 
Pascua, Isla de (Easter Island)       Chile 
 
Passion, Ile de la                    Clipperton Island 
 
Pashtunistan                          Afghanistan; Pakistan 
 
Peking (Beijing)                      China 
 
Pemba Island                          Tanzania 
 
Pentland Firth                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
Perim                                 Yemen 
 
Perouse Strait, La                    Pacific Ocean 
 
Persian Gulf                          Indian Ocean 
 
Perth [US Consulate General]          Australia 
 
Pescadores                            Taiwan 
 
Peshawar [US Consulate]               Pakistan 
 
Peter I Island                        Antarctica 
 
Philip Island                         Norfolk Island 
 
Philippine Sea                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Phnom Penh [US Embassy]               Cambodia 
 
Phoenix Islands                       Kiribati 
 
Pines, Isle of (Isla de la Juventud)  Cuba 
 
Pleasant Island                       Nauru 
 
Plymouth                              Montserrat 
 
Ponape (Pohnpei)                      Micronesia 
 
Ponta Delgada [US Consulate]          Portugal 
 
Port-au-Prince [US Embassy]           Haiti 
 
Port Louis [US Embassy]               Mauritius 
 
Port Moresby [US Embassy]             Papua New Guinea 
 
Porto Alegre [US Consulate]           Brazil 
 
Port-of-Spain [US Embassy]            Trinidad and Tobago 
 
Porto-Novo                            Benin 
 
Portuguese Guinea                     Guinea-Bissau 
 
Portuguese Timor (East Timor)         Indonesia 
 
Port-Vila                             Vanuatu 
 
Poznan [US Consulate General]         Poland 
 
Prague [US Embassy]                   Czech Republic 
 
Praia [US Embassy]                    Cape Verde 
 
Pretoria [US Embassy]                 South Africa 
 
Pribilof Islands                      United States 
 
Prince Edward Island                  Canada 
 
Prince Edward Islands                 South Africa 
 
Prince Patrick Island                 Canada 
 
Principe                              Sao Tome and Principe 
 
Pusan [US Consulate]                  Korea, South 
 
P'yongyang                            Korea, North 
 
Q 
Quebec [US Consulate General]         Canada 
 
Queen Charlotte Islands               Canada 
 
Queen Elizabeth Islands               Canada 
 
Queen Maud Land [claimed by Norway]   Antarctica 
 
Quito [US Embassy]                    Ecuador 
 
R 
Rabat [US Embassy]                    Morocco 
 
Ralik Chain                           Marshall Islands 
 
Rangoon [US Embassy]                  Burma 
 
Ratak Chain                           Marshall Islands 
 
Recife [US Consulate]                 Brazil 
 
Redonda                               Antigua and Barbuda 
 
Red Sea                               Indian Ocean 
 
Revillagigedo Island                  United States 
 
Revillagigedo Islands                 Mexico 
 
Reykjavik [US Embassy]                Iceland 
 
Rhodes                                Greece 
 
Rhodesia                              Zimbabwe 
 
Rhodesia, Northern                    Zambia 
 
Rhodesia, Southern                    Zimbabwe 
 
Riga [US Embassy]                     Latvia 
 
Rio de Janeiro [US Consulate          Brazil 
  General] 
 
Rio de Oro                            Western Sahara 
 
Rio Muni                              Equatorial Guinea 
 
Riyadh [US Embassy]                   Saudi Arabia 
 
Road Town                             British Virgin Islands 
 
Robinson Crusoe Island (Mas           Chile 
  a Tierra) 
 
Rocas, Atol das                       Brazil 
 
Rockall [disputed]                    United Kingdom 
 
Rodrigues                             Mauritius 
 
Rome [US Embassy, US Mission to the   Italy 
  UN Agencies for Food and 
  Agriculture (FODAG)] 
 
Roncador Cay                          Colombia 
 
Roosevelt Island                      Antarctica 
 
Roseau                                Dominica 
 
Ross Dependency [claimed by           Antarctica 
  New Zealand] 
 
Ross Island                           Antarctica 
 
Ross Sea                              Antarctica 
 
Rota                                  Northern Mariana Islands 
 
Rotuma                                Fiji 
 
Ryukyu Islands                        Japan 
 
S 
Saba                                  Netherlands Antilles 
 
Sabah                                 Malaysia 
 
Sable Island                          Canada 
 
Sahel                                 Burkina, Cape Verde, Chad, 
                                        The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, 
                                        Mauritania, Niger, Senegal 
 
Saigon (Ho Chi Minh City)             Vietnam 
 
Saint Brandon                         Mauritius 
 
Saint Christopher and Nevis           Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 
Saint-Denis                           Reunion 
 
Saint George's [US Embassy]           Grenada 
 
Saint George's Channel                Atlantic Ocean 
 
Saint Helier                          Jersey 
 
Saint John's [US Embassy]             Antigua and Barbuda 
 
Saint Lawrence, Gulf of               Atlantic Ocean 
 
Saint Lawrence Island                 United States 
 
Saint Lawrence Seaway                 Atlantic Ocean 
 
Saint Martin                          Guadeloupe 
 
Saint Martin (Sint Maarten)           Netherlands Antilles 
 
Saint Paul Island                     Canada 
 
Saint Paul Island                     United States 
 
Saint Paul Island (Ile Saint-Paul)    French Southern and Antarctic Lands 
 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul Rocks      Brazil 
  (Penedos de Sao Pedro e Sao Paulo) 
 
Saint Peter Port                      Guernsey 
 
Saint Petersburg [US Consulate]       Russia 
 
Saint-Pierre                          Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
 
Saint Vincent Passage                 Atlantic Ocean 
 
Saipan                                Northern Mariana Islands 
 
Sakhalin Island (Ostrov Sakhalin)     Russia 
 
Sala y Gomez, Isla                    Chile 
 
Salisbury (Harare)                    Zimbabwe 
 
Salvador de Bahia [US Consular        Brazil 
  Agency] 
 
Salzburg [US Consulate General]       Austria 
 
Sanaa [US Embassy]                    Yemen 
 
San Ambrosio                          Chile 
 
San Andres y Providencia,             Colombia 
  Archipielago 
 
San Bernardino Strait                 Pacific Ocean 
 
San Felix, Isla                       Chile 
 
San Jose [US Embassy]                 Costa Rica 
 
San Juan                              Puerto Rico 
 
San Luis Potosi [US Consular Agency]  Mexico 
 
San Marino                            San Marino 
 
San Salvador [US Embassy]             El Salvador 
 
Santa Cruz [US Consular Agency]       Bolivia 
 
Santa Cruz Islands                    Solomon Islands 
 
Santiago [US Embassy]                 Chile 
 
Santo Domingo [US Embassy]            Dominican Republic 
 
Sao Paulo [US Consulate General]      Brazil 
 
Sao Pedro e Sao Paulo, Penedos de     Brazil 
 
Sao Tome                              Sao Tome and Principe 
 
Sapporo [US Consulate General]        Japan 
 
Sapudi Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Sarajevo [US Embassy]                 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 
Sarawak                               Malaysia 
 
Sardinia                              Italy 
 
Sargasso Sea                          Atlantic Ocean 
 
Sark                                  Guernsey 
 
Scotia Sea                            Atlantic Ocean 
 
Scotland                              United Kingdom 
 
Scott Island                          Antarctica 
 
Senyavin Islands                      Micronesia, Federated States of 
 
Seoul [US Embassy]                    Korea, South 
 
Serbia                                Serbia and Montenegro 
 
Serrana Bank                          Colombia 
 
Serranilla Bank                       Colombia 
 
Settlement, The                       Christmas Island 
 
Severnaya Zemlya (Northland)          Russia 
 
Shag Island                           Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
 
Shag Rocks                            Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
 
Shanghai [US Consulate General]       China 
 
Shenyang [US Consulate General]       China 
 
Shetland Islands                      United Kingdom 
 
Shikoku                               Japan 
 
Shikotan (Shikotan-to)                Japan 
 
Siam                                  Thailand 
 
Sibutu Passage                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Sicily                                Italy 
 
Sicily, Strait of                     Atlantic Ocean 
 
Sikkim                                India 
 
Sinai                                 Egypt 
 
Singapore [US Embassy]                Singapore 
 
Singapore Strait                      Pacific Ocean 
 
Sinkiang (Xinjiang)                   China 
 
Sint Eustatius                        Netherlands Antilles 
 
Sint Maarten (Saint Martin)           Netherlands Antilles 
 
Skagerrak                             Atlantic Ocean 
 
Skopje                                The Former Yugoslav Republic of  
                                        Macedonia 
 
Society Islands (Iles de la Societe)  French Polynesia 
 
Socotra                               Yemen 
 
Sofia [US Embassy]                    Bulgaria 
 
Solomon Islands, northern             Papua New Guinea 
 
Solomon Islands, southern             Solomon Islands 
 
Solomon Sea                           Pacific Ocean 
 
Songkhla [US Consulate]               Thailand 
 
Sound, The (Oresund)                  Atlantic Ocean 
 
South Atlantic Ocean                  Atlantic Ocean 
 
South China Sea                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Southern Grenadines                   Grenada 
 
Southern Rhodesia                     Zimbabwe 
 
South Georgia                         South Georgia and the South Sandwich  
                                        Islands 
 
South Island                          New Zealand 
 
South Korea                           Korea, South 
 
South Orkney Islands                  Antarctica 
 
South Pacific Ocean                   Pacific Ocean 
 
South Sandwich Islands                South Georgia and the South Sandwich  
                                        Islands 
 
South Shetland Islands                Antarctica 
 
South Tyrol                           Italy 
 
South Vietnam                         Vietnam 
 
South-West Africa                     Namibia 
 
South Yemen (People's Democratic      Yemen 
  Republic of Yemen) 
 
Soviet Union                          Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,  
                                        Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
                                        Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania,  
                                        Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan,  
                                        Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan 
 
Spanish Guinea                        Equatorial Guinea 
 
Spanish Sahara                        Western Sahara 
 
Spitsbergen                           Svalbard 
 
Stanley                               Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
 
Stockholm [US Embassy]                Sweden 
 
Strasbourg [US Consulate General]     France 
 
Stuttgart [US Consulate General]      Germany 
 
Suez, Gulf of                         Indian Ocean 
 
Sulu Archipelago                      Philippines 
 
Sulu Sea                              Pacific Ocean 
 
Sumatra                               Indonesia 
 
Sumba                                 Indonesia 
 
Sunda Islands (Soenda Isles)          Indonesia; Malaysia 
 
Sunda Strait                          Indian Ocean 
 
Surabaya [US Consulate]               Indonesia 
 
Surigao Strait                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Surinam                               Suriname 
 
Suva [US Embassy]                     Fiji 
 
Swains Island                         American Samoa 
 
Swan Islands                          Honduras 
 
Sydney [US Consulate General]         Australia 
 
T 
Tahiti                                French Polynesia 
 
Taipei                                Taiwan 
 
Taiwan Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Tallinn [US Embassy]                  Estonia 
 
Tanganyika                            Tanzania 
 
Tangier                               Morocco 
 
Tarawa                                Kiribati 
 
Tartar Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Tashkent [US Embassy]                 Uzbekistan 
 
Tasmania                              Australia 
 
Tasman Sea                            Pacific Ocean 
 
Taymyr Peninsula (Poluostrov Taymyra) Russia 
 
T'bilisi [US Embassy]                 Georgia 
 
Tegucigalpa [US Embassy]              Honduras 
 
Tehran [US post not maintained;       Iran 
  representation by Swiss Embassy] 
 
Tel Aviv [US Embassy]                 Israel 
 
Terre Adelie (Adelie Land)            Antarctica 
  [claimed by France] 
 
Thailand, Gulf of                     Pacific Ocean 
 
Thessaloniki [US Consulate General]   Greece 
 
Thimphu                               Bhutan 
 
Thurston Island                       Antarctica 
 
Tibet (Xizang)                        China 
 
Tibilisi (see T'bilisi)               Georgia 
 
Tierra del Fuego                      Argentina; Chile 
 
Tijuana [US Consulate General]        Mexico 
 
Timor                                 Indonesia 
 
Timor Sea                             Pacific Ocean 
 
Tinian                                Northern Mariana Islands 
 
Tiran, Strait of                      Indian Ocean 
 
Tirane [US Embassy]                   Albania 
 
Tobago                                Trinidad and Tobago 
 
Tokyo [US Embassy]                    Japan 
 
Tonkin, Gulf of                       Pacific Ocean 
 
Toronto [US Consulate General]        Canada 
 
Torres Strait                         Pacific Ocean 
 
Torshavn                              Faroe Islands 
 
Toshkent (Tashkent)                   Uzbekistan 
 
Transjordan                           Jordan 
 
Transkei                              South Africa 
 
Transylvania                          Romania 
 
Trindade, Ilha de                     Brazil 
 
Tripoli [US post not maintained;      Libya 
  representation by Belgian Embassy] 
 
Tristan da Cunha Group                Saint Helena 
 
Trobriand Islands                     Papua New Guinea 
 
Trucial States                        United Arab Emirates 
 
Truk Islands                          Micronesia 
 
Tsugaru Strait                        Pacific Ocean 
 
Tuamotu Islands (Iles Tuamotu)        French Polynesia 
 
Tubuai Islands (Iles Tubuai)          French Polynesia 
 
Tunis [US Embassy]                    Tunisia 
 
Turin                                 Italy 
 
Turkish Straits                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Turkmeniya                            Turkmenistan 
 
Turks Island Passage                  Atlantic Ocean 
 
Tyrol, South                          Italy 
 
Tyrrhenian Sea                        Atlantic Ocean 
 
U 
Udorn (Udon Thani) [US Consulate]     Thailand 
 
Ulaanbaatar [US Embassy]              Mongolia 
 
Ullung-do                             Korea, South 
 
Unimak Pass [strait]                  Pacific Ocean 
 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics   Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,  
                                        Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
                                        Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania,  
                                        Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan,  
                                        Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan 
 
United Arab Republic                  Egypt; Syria 
 
Upper Volta                           Burkina 
 
USSR                                  Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,  
                                        Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, 
                                        Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania,  
                                        Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan,  
                                        Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan 
 
V 
Vaduz [US post not maintained;        Liechtenstein 
  representation from Zurich, 
  Switzerland] 
 
Vakhan (Wakhan Corridor)              Afghanistan 
 
Valletta [US Embassy]                 Malta 
 
Valley, The                           Anguilla 
 
Vancouver [US Consulate General]      Canada 
 
Vancouver Island                      Canada 
 
Van Diemen Strait                     Pacific Ocean 
 
Vatican City [US Embassy]             Holy See 
 
Velez de la Gomera, Penon de          Spain 
 
Venda                                 South Africa 
 
Verde Island Passage                  Pacific Ocean 
 
Victoria                              Hong Kong 
 
Victoria [US Embassy]                 Seychelles 
 
Vienna [US Embassy, US Mission to     Austria 
  International Organizations in 
  Vienna (UNVIE)] 
 
Vientiane [US Embassy]                Laos 
 
Vilnius [US Embassy]                  Lithuania 
 
Vladivostok [US Consulate]            Russia 
 
Volcano Islands                       Japan 
 
Vostok Island                         Kiribati 
 
Vrangelya, Ostrov (Wrangel Island)    Russia 
 
W 
Wakhan Corridor (now Vakhan)          Afghanistan 
 
Wales                                 United Kingdom 
 
Walvis Bay                            Namibia 
 
Warsaw [US Embassy]                   Poland 
 
Washington, DC [The Permanent Mission United States 
  of the US to the Organization of 
  American States (OAS)] 
 
Weddell Sea                           Atlantic Ocean 
 
Wellington [US Embassy]               New Zealand 
 
Western Channel (West Korea Strait)   Pacific Ocean 
 
West Germany (Federal Republic of     Germany 
  Germany) 
 
West Island                           Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
 
West Korea Strait (Western Channel)   Pacific Ocean 
 
West Pakistan                         Pakistan 
 
Wetar Strait                          Pacific Ocean 
 
White Sea                             Arctic Ocean 
 
Willemstad                            Netherlands Antilles 
 
Windhoek [US Embassy]                 Namibia 
 
Windward Passage                      Atlantic Ocean 
 
Wrangel Island (Ostrov Vrangelya)     Russia [de facto] 
 
Y 
Yamoussoukro                          Cote d'Ivoire 
 
Yaounde [US Embassy]                  Cameroon 
 
Yap Islands                           Micronesia 
 
Yaren                                 Nauru 
 
Yellow Sea                            Pacific Ocean 
 
Yemen (Aden) [People's Democratic     Yemen 
  Republic of Yemen] 
 
Yemen Arab Republic                   Yemen 
 
Yemen, North [Yemen Arab Republic]    Yemen 
 
Yemen (Sanaa) [Yemen Arab Republic]   Yemen 
 
Yemen, People's Democratic            Yemen 
  Republic of 
 
Yemen, South [People's Democratic     Yemen 
  Republic of Yemen] 
 
Yerevan [US Embassy]                  Armenia 
 
Youth, Isle of (Isla de la Juventud)  Cuba 
 
Yucatan Channel                       Atlantic Ocean 
 
Yugoslavia                            Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,  
                                        Serbia and Montenegro, Slovenia,  
                                        The Former Yugoslav Republic of  
                                        Macedonia 
 
Z 
Zagreb [US Embassy]                   Croatia 
 
Zanzibar                              Tanzania 
 
Zurich [US Consulate General]         Switzerland



End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of the 1994 CIA World Factbook


