Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The First Letter of 
Paul to the 
Thessalonians

1
	1 Paul, Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the 
Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: grace and 
peace to you. 
	2 We give thanks to God always for all of you, mentioning you 
in our prayers; 3 remembering before our God and Father your work of 
faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ. 
4 For we know, brethren beloved by God, that he has chosen you; 5 for 
our gospel came to you not only in word, but also in power and in the 
Holy Spirit and with full conviction. You know what kind of men we 
proved to be among you for your sake. 6 You became imitators of us and 
of the Lord, for you received the word in much affliction, with the joy of 
the Holy Spirit; 7 so that you became an example to all the believers in 
Macedonia and in Achaia. 8 For not only has the word of the Lord 
sounded forth from you in Macedonia and Achaia, but your faith in God 
has gone forth everywhere, so that we have no need to say anything. 9 For 
they themselves report about us what kind of a reception we had with you, 
and how you turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God, 10 
and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead—
Jesus, who rescues us from the wrath to come. 
2
	1 For you yourselves know, brethren, that our visit to you was 
not in vain; 2 but after we had already suffered and been shamefully 
treated in Philippi, as you know, we had the boldness in our God to speak 
to you the gospel of God in the face of great opposition. 3 For our appeal 
does not spring from error or impurity, nor is it made with deceit; 4 but 
just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so 
we speak, not to please men, but to please God who tests our hearts. 5 
For, as you know, we never used flattery nor a pretext for greed—God is 
witness—6 nor did we seek glory from men, either from you or from 
others, though we might have made demands as apostles of Christ. 7 But 
we were gentle among you, like a mother nursing her little children. 8 
Having so fond an affection for you, we were ready to share with you not 
only the gospel of God but also our own lives, because you had become 
very dear to us. 9 For you remember our labor and toil, brethren; we 
worked night and day, that we might not be a burden to any of you, while 
we preached to you the gospel of God. 10 You are witnesses, and God 
also, how holy and righteous and blameless we behaved toward you 
believers; 11 for you know how, as a father with his own children, we 
exhorted each one of you and encouraged you and charged you 12 to live 
a life worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory. 
	13 And we also thank God constantly for this, that when you 
received the word of God which you heard from us, you accepted it not as 
the word of men but as what it really is, the word of God, which is at 
work in you who believe. 14 For you, brethren, became imitators of the 
churches of God in Christ Jesus which are in Judea, for you suffered the 
same things from your own countrymen as they did from the Jews, 15 who 
both killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and also drove us out. They 
displease God and are hostile to all men, 16 hindering us from speaking 
to the Gentiles so that they may be saved; with the result that they always 
fill up the measure of their sins. But wrath has come upon them at last. 
	17 But since we were taken away from you, brethren, for a short 
time, in person not in heart, we endeavored the more eagerly and with 
great desire to see you face to face. 18 For we wanted to come to you—I, 
Paul, again and again—but Satan hindered us. 19 For who is our hope or 
joy or crown of exultation? Is it not even you, in the presence of our Lord 
Jesus at his coming? 20 For you are our glory and joy. 
3
	1 Therefore when we could endure it no longer, we thought it 
best to be left behind at Athens alone, 2 and we sent Timothy, our brother 
and God's fellow worker in the gospel of Christ, to strengthen and 
encourage you in your faith, 3 so that no one would be unsettled by these 
afflictions. You yourselves know that we have been destined for this. 4 
For indeed when we were with you, we kept telling you in advance that 
we were going to suffer affliction; and so it came to pass, as you know. 5 
For this reason, when I could endure it no longer, I also sent to find out 
about your faith, for fear that the tempter might have tempted you, and our 
labor would be in vain. 
	6 But now that Timothy has come to us from you, and has 
brought us the good news of your faith and love and reported that you 
always remember us kindly and long to see us, just as we long to see 
you—7 for this reason, brethren, in all our distress and affliction we were 
comforted about you through your faith; 8 for now we really live, if you 
stand firm in the Lord. 9 For what thanksgiving can we render to God for 
you in return for all the joy which we feel for your sake before our God, 
10 as we night and day keep praying most earnestly that we may see you 
face to face and supply what is lacking in your faith? 
	11 Now may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus, 
direct our way to you; 12 and may the Lord make you increase and 
abound in love for one another and for all, just as we do for you, 13 so 
that he may establish your hearts without blame in holiness before our 
God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints. 
4
	1 Finally, brethren, we request and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, 
that as you learned from us how you ought to live and to please God, just 
as you are doing, you do so more and more. 2 For you know what 
instructions we gave you by the authority of the Lord Jesus. 3 For this is 
the will of God, your sanctification: that is, that you should abstain from 
sexual immorality; 4 that each one of you know how to take his own 
spouse for himself in holiness and honor, 5 not in the passion of lust like 
the heathen, who do not know God; 6 and that no man transgress and 
wrong his brother in this matter because the Lord is the avenger in all 
these things, just as we also told you before and solemnly warned you. 7 
For God has not called us to impurity, but to holiness. 8 Therefore, he 
who rejects this instruction does not reject man but God, who gives you 
his Holy Spirit. 
	9 Now concerning love of the brethren you have no need to have 
any one write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love 
one another; 10 and indeed you do love all the brethren throughout 
Macedonia. But we urge you, brethren, to do so more and more. 11 Make 
it your ambition to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business and to 
work with your hands, just as we told you, 12 so that your daily life may 
win the respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on 
anyone. 
	13 But we do not want you to be ignorant, brethren, about those 
who are asleep, so that you will not grieve as do the rest who have no 
hope. 14 For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so God 
will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in Jesus. 
	15 For this we declare to you by the word of the Lord, that we 
who are alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord, will not precede 
those who have fallen asleep. 16 For the Lord himself will descend from 
heaven, with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with 
the trumpet call of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first. 17 Then we 
who are alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the 
clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so we shall always be with the 
Lord. 18 Therefore comfort one another with these words. 
5
	1 Now as to the times and the seasons, brethren, you have no 
need to have anything written to you. 2 For you yourselves know well that 
the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night. 3 While people are 
saying, "Peace and safety," then destruction will come upon them 
suddenly as labor pains upon a woman with child, and they will not 
escape. 4 But you, brethren, are not in darkness so that this day should 
surprise you like a thief. 5 For you are all sons of light and sons of the 
day; we are not of the night or of darkness. 6 So then let us not sleep, as 
others do, but let us be alert and sober. 7 For those who sleep, sleep at 
night; and those who get drunk, get drunk at night. 8 But, since we 
belong to the day, let us be sober, and put on the breastplate of faith and 
love, and as a helmet the hope of salvation. 9 For God has not destined us 
to wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, 10 who 
died for us, so that whether we are awake or asleep, we will live together 
with him. 11 Therefore encourage one another and build up one another, 
just as you also are doing. 
	12 But we ask you, brethren, to respect those who labor among 
you and are over you in the Lord and admonish you, 13 and that you 
esteem them very highly in love because of their work. Live in peace with 
one another. 14 And we urge you, brethren, admonish the idlers, 
encourage the fainthearted, help the weak, be patient with everyone. 15 
See that none of you repays evil for evil, but always seek to do good to 
one another and to all. 
	16 Rejoice always, 17 pray without ceasing, 18 give thanks in all 
circumstances; for this is God's will for you in Christ Jesus. 19 Do not 
quench the Spirit; 20 do not despise prophecies. 21 But test everything; 
hold fast to what is good. 22 Abstain from every form of evil. 
	23 Now may the God of peace himself sanctify you entirely; and 
may your whole spirit and soul and body be kept blameless at the coming 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 24 He who calls you is faithful, and he will do 
it. 
	25 Brethren, pray for us. 
	26 Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss. 27 I charge you by the 
Lord to have this letter read to all the brethren. 
	28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 



First Thessalonians, page 1
