Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The First Letter of 
Paul to the 
Corinthians

1
	1 Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, 
and our brother Sosthenes, 2 to the church of God which is at Corinth, to 
those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints together with all those 
who in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both their 
Lord and ours: 3 grace to you and peace from God our Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 
	4 I thank my God always for you because of the grace of God 
which was given you in Christ Jesus, 5 that in every way you were 
enriched in him in all speech and all knowledge—6 even as the testimony 
of Christ was confirmed in you, 7 so that you are not lacking in any 
spiritual gift, as you eagerly wait for the revealing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; 8 who will also confirm you to the end, blameless in the day of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 9 God is faithful, by whom you were called into 
fellowship with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. 
	10 I appeal to you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that all of you agree and that there be no divisions among you, but 
that you be united in the same mind and in the same judgment. 11 For I 
have been informed by Chloe's people, that there are quarrels among you, 
my brethren. 12 What I mean is this, that each one of you says, "I am of 
Paul," and "I of Apollos," and "I of Cephas," and "I of Christ." 13 Is 
Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the 
name of Paul? 14 I am thankful that I baptized none of you except 
Crispus and Gaius, 15 so that no one would say you were baptized in my 
name. 16 (Now I did baptize also the household of Stephanas; beyond 
that, I do not know whether I baptized any one else.) 17 For Christ did 
not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel—not with words of 
human wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power. 
	18 For the word of the cross is foolishness to those who are 
perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. 19 For it 
is written, 
	"I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 
		and the cleverness of the clever I will frustrate." 
20 Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of 
this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 21 For 
since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know 
God, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to 
save those who believe. 22 Jews demand signs and Greeks look for 
wisdom, 23 but we preach Christ crucified, to Jews a stumbling block and 
to Gentiles foolishness, 24 but to those who are the called, both Jews and 
Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. 25 For the 
foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is 
stronger than men. 
	26 For consider your call, brethren; not many of you were wise 
according to fleshly standards, not many were powerful, not many were of 
noble birth. 27 But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame 
the wise, God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong, 28 
God chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things, and the 
things that are not, to nullify the things that are, 29 so that no flesh may 
boast before God. 30 It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, 
who became to us wisdom from God, and righteousness and 
sanctification, and redemption, 31 therefore, as it is written, "Let him who 
boasts, boast in the Lord."
2
	1 When I came to you, brethren, I did not come with superiority 
of speech or of wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony of God. 2 For I 
resolved to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ, and him 
crucified. 3 I was with you in weakness and in fear and in much 
trembling, 4 and my message and my preaching were not in persuasive 
words of wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, 5 so 
that your faith might not rest on the wisdom of men, but on the power of 
God. 
	6 Yet we do speak a wisdom among the mature, a wisdom, 
however, not of this age nor of the rulers of this age, who are passing 
away. 7 But we speak of God's secret wisdom, a wisdom that has been 
hidden and which God destined for our glory before the ages. 8 None of 
the rulers of this age understood it; for if they had, they would not have 
crucified the Lord of glory. 9 But, as it is written, 
	"No eye has seen, nor ear heard, 
		nor the heart of man conceived 
	what God has prepared for those who love him," 
10 God has revealed them to us through the Spirit. For the Spirit searches 
all things, even the depths of God. 11 For who among men knows the 
thoughts of a man except the man's spirit which is in him? Even so no one 
knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God. 12 Now we have 
received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that 
we may understand the things freely given to us by God. 13 This is what 
we speak, not in words taught us by human wisdom but in words taught 
by the Spirit, expressing spiritual truths in spiritual words. 14 But the 
natural man does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are 
foolishness to him; and he cannot understand them, because they are 
spiritually discerned. 15 But the spiritual man judges all things, yet he 
himself is rightly judged by no one. 
16	"For who has known the mind of the Lord 
		that he may instruct him?" 
But we have the mind of Christ. 
3
	1 But I, brethren, could not address you as spiritual men, but as 
carnal men, as infants in Christ. 2 I gave you milk, not solid food; for you 
were not yet ready for it. Indeed, even now you are not ready, 3 for you 
are still carnal. For since there is jealousy and strife among you, are you 
not carnal, and are you not walking like mere men? 4 For when one says, 
"I am of Paul," and another, "I am of Apollos," are you not mere men? 5 
What then is Apollos? And what is Paul? Servants through whom you 
believed, even as the Lord assigned to each one. 6 I planted, Apollos 
watered, but God was causing the growth. 7 So neither he who plants nor 
he who waters is anything, but only God who gives the growth. 8 Now he 
who plants and he who waters are one, and each will receive his own 
reward according to his own labor. 9 For we are God's fellow workers; 
you are God's field, God's building. 
	10 According to the grace of God which was given to me, like a 
wise master builder I laid a foundation, and another is building on it. But 
each man must be careful how he builds on it. 11 For no other foundation 
can any one lay than the one which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 12 Now 
if any man builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, 
wood, hay, straw, 13 each man's work will become evident; for the day 
will show it, because it is to be revealed with fire, and the fire itself will 
test the quality of each man's work. 14 If any man's work which he has 
built on it survives, he will receive a reward. 15 If any man's work is 
burned up, he will suffer loss; but he himself will be saved, but only as 
through fire. 16 Do you not know that you are God's temple and that 
God's Spirit dwells in you? 17 If any one destroys God's temple, God will 
destroy him. For God's temple is holy, and that temple you are. 
	18 Let no one deceive himself. If any one among you thinks that 
he is wise in this age, he must become a fool so that he may become wise. 
19 For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, 
	"He catches the wise in their own craftiness"; 
20 and again, 
	"The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, 
		that they are futile." 
21 So then let no one boast of men. For all things are yours, 22 whether 
Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or 
the future; all belong to you, 23 and you belong to Christ; and Christ 
belongs to God. 
4
	1 This is how one should regard us, as servants of Christ and 
stewards of the mysteries of God. 2 Moreover it is required of stewards 
that they be found trustworthy. 3 But with me it is a very small thing that 
I should be judged by you, or by any human court; I do not even judge 
myself. 4 I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not 
acquitted by this. It is the Lord who judges me. 5 Therefore do not go on 
passing judgment before the time, but wait until the Lord comes who will 
both bring to light the things hidden in the darkness and disclose the 
motives of men's hearts. Then every man will receive his praise from God. 
	6 Now these things, brethren, I have figuratively applied to 
myself and Apollos for your benefit, so that in us you may learn not to go 
beyond what is written, so that no one of you will become arrogant in 
favor of one against the other. 7 For who regards you as different? What 
do you have that you did not receive? And if you did receive it, why do 
you boast as if you had not received it? 8 You are already filled! You 
have already become rich! You have become kings without us! And 
indeed, I wish that you had become kings so that we also might reign with 
you. 9 For, I think that God has exhibited us apostles last of all, like men 
condemned to death; because we have become a spectacle to the world, 
both to angels and to men. 10 We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are 
wise in Christ; we are weak, but you are strong; you are distinguished, 
but we are without honor. 11 To this present hour we are both hungry and 
thirsty, and we are poorly clothed, and roughly treated, and homeless; 12 
and we toil, working with our own hands. When we are reviled, we bless; 
when we are persecuted, we endure; 13 when we are slandered, we try to 
conciliate; we have become, and are now, as the scum of the world, the 
refuse of all things. 
	14 I do not write this to shame you, but to admonish you as my 
beloved children. 15 For though you have countless guides in Christ, you 
do not have many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I became your father through 
the gospel. 16 Therefore I urge you, be imitators of me. 17 For this reason 
I have sent to you Timothy, who is my beloved and faithful child in the 
Lord, and he will remind you of my ways which are in Christ, just as I 
teach everywhere in every church. 18 Now some have become arrogant, as 
though I were not coming to you. 19 But I will come to you soon, if the 
Lord wills, and I will find out, not the words of these arrogant people, but 
their power. 20 For the kingdom of God does not consist in talk but in 
power. 21 What do you desire? Shall I come to you with a rod, or with 
love and a spirit of gentleness? 
5
	1 It is actually reported that there is immorality among you, and 
of a kind that does not occur even among pagans: a man has his father's 
wife. 2 And you are arrogant! Ought you not rather to have mourned? Let 
the one who has done this be removed from your midst. 3 For though I am 
absent in body, I am present in spirit, and have already passed judgment 
on the one who has committed this, as if I were present. 4 In the name of 
our Lord Jesus, when you are assembled, and I with you in spirit, and the 
power of our Lord Jesus is present, 5 you are to deliver this man to Satan 
for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus. 6 Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a 
little leaven leavens the whole lump of dough? 7 Cleanse out the old 
leaven that you may be a new lump, as you really are unleavened. For 
Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed. 8 Let us, therefore, 
celebrate the festival, not with the old leaven, the leaven of malice and 
wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 
	9 I wrote you in my letter not to associate with immoral people; 
10 not at all meaning the immoral people of this world, or with the greedy 
and swindlers, or with idolaters, for then you would have to go out of the 
world. 11 But actually, I wrote to you not to associate with any one who 
bears the name of brother if he is an immoral person, or greedy, or an 
idolater, or a reviler, or a drunkard, or a swindler—not even to eat with 
such a one. 12 For what have I to do with judging outsiders? Is it not 
those inside the church whom you are to judge? 13 God judges those 
outside. "Expel the wicked man from among you." 
6
	1 When any one of you has a grievance against a brother, does 
he dare go to law before the unrighteous instead of before the saints? 2 
Do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is 
to be judged by you, are you not competent to try trivial cases? 3 Do you 
not know that we will judge angels? How much more matters of this life! 
4 So if you have disputes about such matters, do you appoint them as 
judges who are of no account in the church? 5 I say this to your shame. 
Can it be that there is no man among you wise enough to decide between 
his brethren, 6 but brother goes to law against brother, and that before 
unbelievers? 7 Actually, then, it is already a defeat for you, that you have 
lawsuits with one another. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be 
defrauded? 8 Instead, you yourselves defraud and do wrong, and you even 
do this to your brethren. 9 Or do you not know that the unrighteous will 
not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived; neither the immoral, 
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor sexual perverts, 10 nor thieves, nor the 
greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom 
of God. 11 And such were some of you. But you were washed, you were 
sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in 
the Spirit of our God. 
	12 "All things are lawful for me," but not all things are helpful. 
"All things are lawful for me," but I will not be mastered by anything. 13 
"Food is for the stomach and the stomach for food"—but God will 
destroy them both. The body is not meant for immorality, but for the 
Lord, and the Lord for the body. 14 By his power God raised the Lord, 
and he will also raise us up. 15 Do you not know that your bodies are 
members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make 
them members of a prostitute? Never! 16 Or do you not know that he who 
joins himself to a prostitute becomes one body with her? For, as it is 
written, "The two shall become one flesh." 17 But he who unites himself 
with the Lord is one spirit with him. 18 Flee immorality. Every other sin 
that a man commits is outside the body, but the immoral man sins against 
his own body. 19 Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy 
Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not 
your own; 20 you were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your 
body. 
7
	1 Now concerning the matters about which you wrote, it is good 
for a man not to touch a woman. 2 But because of immorality, each man 
should have his own wife, and each woman her own husband. 3 The 
husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife 
to her husband. 4 The wife does not have authority over her own body, 
but the husband does; and likewise also the husband does not have 
authority over his own body, but the wife does. 5 Do not deprive one 
another, except by agreement for a time, so that you may devote 
yourselves to prayer, and then come together again so that Satan will not 
tempt you because of your lack of self-control. 6 I say this by way of 
concession, not of command. 7 I wish that all men were as I myself am. 
But each man has his own gift from God, one in this manner and another 
in that. 
	8 But I say to the unmarried and to the widows that it is good for 
them if they remain even as I. 9 But if they cannot exercise self-control, 
they should marry; for it is better to marry than to burn with passion. 10 
To the married I give charge, not I but the Lord, that the wife should not 
separate from her husband 11 (but if she does leave, she must remain 
unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband), and that the husband 
should not divorce his wife. 12 But to the rest I say, not the Lord, that if 
any brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with 
him, he must not divorce her. 13 If any woman has a husband who is an 
unbeliever, and he consents to live with her, she must not divorce him. 14 
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified through his wife, and the 
unbelieving wife is sanctified through her husband. Otherwise, your 
children would be unclean, but as it is they are holy. 15 But if the 
unbelieving partner leaves, let him do so; in such a case the brother or 
sister is not bound. For God has called us to peace. 16 For how do you 
know, O wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you 
know, O husband, whether you will save your wife? 
	17 Only, let each one lead the life which the Lord has assigned 
to him, and in which God has called him. This is the rule I lay down in all 
the churches. 18 Was any man called when he was already circumcised? 
He is not to become uncircumcised. Has anyone been called in 
uncircumcision? He is not to be circumcised. 19 Circumcision is nothing 
and uncircumcision is nothing, but keeping the commandments of God is 
what counts. 20 Each one should remain in the state in which he was 
called. 21 Were you a slave when you were called? Do not let it trouble 
you—but if you can gain your freedom, do so. 22 For he who was called 
in the Lord as a slave is the Lord's freedman; likewise he who was free 
when called is Christ's slave. 23 You were bought with a price; do not 
become slaves of men. 24 Brethren, let each one remain with God in that 
condition in which he was called. 
	25 Now concerning virgins, I have no command of the Lord, but 
I give my opinion as one who by the Lord's mercy is trustworthy. 26 I 
think that in view of the present distress it is good for a person to remain 
as he is. 27 Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek to be free. Are you free 
from a wife? Do not seek marriage. 28 But if you marry, you have not 
sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. Yet those who marry 
will have troubles in this flesh, and I am trying to spare you. 29 I mean, 
brethren, the appointed time has grown very short; so that from now on, 
those who have wives should live as though they had none, 30 and those 
who mourn, as though they were not mourning; and those who rejoice, as 
though they were not rejoicing; and those who buy, as though they did 
not possess; 31 and those who use the world, as though they did not make 
full use of it. For the form of this world is passing away. 32 But I want 
you to be free from concern. One who is unmarried is concerned about the 
affairs of the Lord, how he may please the Lord; 33 but a married man is 
concerned about the affairs of the world, how he may please his wife, 34 
and his interests are divided. The unmarried woman, and the virgin, is 
concerned about the affairs of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body 
and spirit; but the married woman is concerned about the affairs of the 
world, how she may please her husband. 35 This I say for your own 
benefit, not to put a restraint upon you, but to promote what is good and 
to secure undivided devotion to the Lord. 
	36 But if any man thinks that he is not acting properly toward 
his betrothed, if she is past her youth, and if it must be so, let him do 
what he wishes, he does not sin; let them marry. 37 But he who stands 
firm in his heart, being under no constraint, but has control over his own 
will, and has decided this in his own heart, to keep her as his betrothed, 
he will do well. 38 So then he who marries his betrothed does well, and 
he who does not marry her will do better. 
	39 A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives. But if her 
husband dies, she is free to be married to whom she wishes, only in the 
Lord. 40 But in my judgment she is happier if she remains as she is; and I 
think that I also have the Spirit of God. 
8
	1 Now concerning food sacrificed to idols: we know that we all 
possess knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. 2 If anyone 
imagines that he knows something, he does not yet know as he ought to 
know. 3 But if anyone loves God, he is known by him. 4 Therefore 
concerning the eating of food sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is 
nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one. 5 For even if there 
are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as indeed there are 
many "gods" and many "lords"), 6 yet for us there is but one God, the 
Father, from whom are all things and for whom we exist; and one Lord, 
Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and through whom we exist. 
	7 However, not all possess this knowledge. But some, being 
accustomed to idols, eat food as really sacrificed to an idol; and their 
conscience, being weak, is defiled. 8 But food will not commend us to 
God; we are no worse if we do not eat, and no better if we do. 9 But take 
care that this liberty of yours does not somehow become a stumbling 
block to the weak. 10 For if a man sees you, who have knowledge, at 
table in an idol's temple, will not his conscience, if he is weak, be 
encouraged to eat food sacrificed to idols? 11 And so by your knowledge 
this weak man is destroyed, the brother for whom Christ died. 12 Thus, 
sinning against your brethren and wounding their conscience when it is 
weak, you sin against Christ. 13 Therefore, if food causes my brother to 
fall, I will never eat meat again, so that I will not cause my brother to fall. 
9
	1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our 
Lord? Are you not my work in the Lord? 2 If to others I am not an apostle, 
at least I am to you; for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord. 
	3 This is my defense to those who would examine me. 4 Do we 
not have the right to food and drink? 5 Do we not have a right to take 
along a believing wife, even as the other apostles and the brothers of the 
Lord and Cephas? 6 Or is it only Barnabas and I who have no right to 
refrain from working for a living? 7 Who at any time serves as a soldier at 
his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? 
Who tends a flock and does not drink of the milk? 8 Do I say this merely 
from a human point of view? Does not the Law say the same thing? 9 For 
it is written in the Law of Moses, "You shall not muzzle an ox while it is 
treading out the grain." Is it for oxen that God is concerned? 10 Or is he 
speaking altogether for our sake? Yes, for our sake it was written, because 
the plowman ought to plow in hope, and the thresher to thresh in hope of 
sharing the crops. 11 If we have sown spiritual seed among you, is it too 
much if we reap a material harvest from you? 12 If others share this right 
of support from you, do not we all the more? 
	Nevertheless, we did not make use of this right, but we endure 
anything rather than put an obstacle in the way of the gospel of Christ. 13 
Do you not know that those who work in the temple get their food from 
the temple, and those who serve at the altar share in what is offered on the 
altar? 14 In the same way, the Lord commanded that those who proclaim 
the gospel should get their living from the gospel. 15 But I have not used 
any of these rights. And I am not writing this in the hope that you will do 
such things for me. I would rather die than have anyone deprive me of my 
ground for boasting. 16 For if I preach the gospel, I have nothing to boast 
of, for I am under compulsion. For woe is me if I do not preach the 
gospel! 17 For if I do this voluntarily, I have a reward; but if it is not of 
my will, I have a stewardship entrusted to me. 18 What then is my 
reward? Just this: that in my preaching I may offer the gospel free of 
charge, and so not make full use of my right in the gospel. 
	19 For though I am free from all men, I have made myself a slave 
to all, that I might win the more. 20 To the Jews I became as a Jew, in 
order to win Jews; to those under the law I became as one under the 
law—though not being myself under the law—so that I might win those 
under the law. 21 To those who are without law, I became as one without 
law, though not being without the law of God but under the law of Christ, 
so that I might win those who are without the law. 22 To the weak I 
became weak, that I might win the weak. I have become all things to all 
men, so that I might by all means save some. 23 I do it all for the sake of 
the gospel, that I may share in its blessings. 
	24 Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only 
one receives the prize? Run in such a way that you may win. 25 Everyone 
who competes in the games exercises self-control in all things. They do it 
to receive a perishable wreath, but we an imperishable. 26 Therefore I do 
not run aimlessly. I do not box as a man beating the air. 27 But I 
discipline my body and make it my slave, so that, after I have preached to 
others, I myself will not be disqualified. 
10
	1 For I do not want you to be unaware, brethren, that our fathers 
were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea; 2 and all were 
baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea; 3 and all ate the same 
spiritual food; 4 and all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank 
from a spiritual rock which followed them; and the rock was Christ. 5 
Nevertheless, with most of them God was not pleased; for they were 
overthrown in the wilderness. 6 Now these things are examples for us, not 
to desire evil things as they did. 7 Do not be idolaters, as some of them 
were; as it is written, "The people sat down to eat and drink, and stood up 
to play." 8 We must not indulge in immorality as some of them did, and 
twenty-three thousand fell in one day. 9 We must not put the Lord to the 
test, as some of them did and were destroyed by serpents. 10 Nor 
grumble, as some of them did, and were destroyed by the destroyer. 11 
Now these things happened to them as an example, and they were written 
down for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the ages have come. 12 
Therefore let any one who thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall. 13 
No temptation has overtaken you but such as is common to man. And God 
is faithful, who will not let you be tempted beyond what you are able, but 
with the temptation will provide the way of escape also, so that you will 
be able to endure it. 
	14 Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry. 15 I speak as to 
sensible men; judge for yourselves what I say. 16 The cup of blessing 
which we bless, is it not a participation in the blood of Christ? The bread 
which we break, is it not a participation in the body of Christ? 17 
Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body, for we all 
partake of the one bread. 18 Consider Israel after the flesh; are not those 
who eat the sacrifices partners in the altar? 19 What do I mean then? That 
a thing offered to idols is anything, or that an idol is anything? 20 No, but 
I say that the things pagans sacrifice they offer to demons and not to God. 
I do not want you to be partners with demons. 21 You cannot drink the 
cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You cannot partake of the table 
of the Lord and the table of demons. 22 Are we trying to provoke the Lord 
to jealousy? Are we stronger than he? 
	23 "All things are lawful," but not all things are helpful. "All 
things are lawful," but not all things build up. 24 Let no one seek his own 
good, but the good of his neighbor. 25 Eat anything that is sold in the 
meat market without raising questions of conscience; 26 for, "The earth is 
the Lord's, and everything in it." 27 If one of the unbelievers invites you 
to dinner and you want to go, eat whatever is set before you without 
raising questions of conscience. 28 But if anyone says to you, "This has 
been offered in sacrifice," then do not eat it, both for the sake of the man 
who informed you and for conscience' sake—29 the other man's 
conscience, I mean, not yours. For why should my freedom be judged by 
another's conscience? 30 If I partake with thankfulness, why am I 
denounced because of that for which I give thanks? 31 So, whether you 
eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God. 32 Give no 
offense either to Jews or to Greeks or to the church of God, 23 just as I 
try to please all men in everything I do, not seeking my own advantage, 
but that of many, that they may be saved. 
11
 1 Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ. 
	2 I praise you because you remember me in everything and hold 
firmly to the traditions, just as I delivered them to you. 3 But I want you 
to understand that Christ is the head of every man, and the man is the 
head of a woman, and God is the head of Christ. 4 Every man who prays 
or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head. 5 But every 
woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her 
head—it is the same as if her head were shaved. 6 For if a woman does 
not cover her head, she should have her hair cut off; but if it is disgraceful 
for a woman to have her hair cut or shaved off, let her cover her head. 7 
For a man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of 
God; but the woman is the glory of man. 8 For man does not originate 
from woman, but woman from man; 9 neither was man created for woman, 
but woman for man. 10 Therefore the woman ought to have a symbol of 
authority on her head, because of the angels. 11 In the Lord, however, 
woman is not independent of man, nor is man independent of woman. 12 
For as woman was made from man, so also man is born of woman. And 
all things are from God. 13 Judge for yourselves: is it proper for a woman 
to pray to God with her head uncovered? 14 Does not even nature itself 
teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him, 15 but if a 
woman has long hair, it is her glory? For her hair is given to her for a 
covering. 16 If anyone wants to be contentious, we have no other practice, 
nor do the churches of God. 
	17 But in the following instructions, I do not praise you, because 
you come together not for the better but for the worse. 18 For, in the first 
place, when you come together as a church, I hear that there are divisions 
among you; and I partly believe it. 19 For there must be factions among 
you in order that those who are genuine among you may be recognized. 20 
Therefore when you meet together, it is not the Lord's supper that you eat, 
21 for in eating, each one goes ahead with his own meal, and one is 
hungry and another is drunk. 22 What! Do you not have houses to eat and 
drink in? Or do you despise the church of God and humiliate those who 
have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? No, I 
will not. 
	23 For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you, that 
the Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took bread, 24 and 
when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, "This is my body, which 
is for you; do this in remembrance of me." 25 In the same way he took the 
cup also after supper, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood; 
do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me." 26 For as often 
as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord's death 
until he comes. 
	27 Whoever, therefore, eats the bread or drinks the cup of the 
Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of profaning the body and 
blood of the Lord. 28 Let a man examine himself, and so eat of the bread 
and drink of the cup. 29 For anyone who eats and drinks without 
recognizing the body eats and drinks judgment on himself. 30 That is why 
many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen 
asleep. 31 But if we judged ourselves rightly, we would not be judged. 32 
But when we are judged, we are disciplined by the Lord so that we will 
not be condemned along with the world. 33 So then, my brethren, when 
you come together to eat, wait for one another. 34 If anyone is hungry, let 
him eat at home, so that you will not come together for judgment. About 
the other things I will give directions when I come. 
12
	1 Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I do not want you to 
be uninformed. 2 You know that when you were pagans, you were led 
astray to mute idols, however you may have been moved. 3 Therefore I tell 
you that no one who is speaking by the Spirit of God says, "Jesus be 
cursed," and no one can say, "Jesus is Lord," except by the Holy Spirit. 
	4 Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit. 5 And 
there are varieties of service, but the same Lord. 6 There are varieties of 
working, but the same God who works all of them in all men. 7 But to 
each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the common good. 8 
To one is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the 
word of knowledge according to the same Spirit, 9 to another faith by the 
same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit, 10 and to 
another the working of miracles, and to another prophecy, and to another 
distinguishing between spirits, to another various kinds of tongues, and to 
another the interpretation of tongues. 11 But one and the same Spirit 
works all these things, distributing to each one individually just as he 
wills. 
	12 For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the 
members of the body, though they are many, are one body, so it is with 
Christ. 13 For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—whether 
Jews or Greeks, slaves or free—and we were all made to drink of one 
Spirit. 14 For the body is not made up of one member but of many. 15 If 
the foot should say, "Because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the 
body," it would not for that reason be any less a part of the body. 16 And 
if the ear should say, "Because I am not an eye, I do not belong to the 
body," it would not for that reason be any less a part of the body. 17 If the 
whole body were an eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole body 
were an ear, where would be the sense of smell? 18 But now God has 
arranged the members in the body, each one of them, just as he desired. 
19 If they were all one member, where would the body be? 20 As it is, 
there are many parts, but one body. 21 And the eye cannot say to the 
hand, "I have no need of you," nor again the head to the feet, "I have no 
need of you." 22 On the contrary, the parts of the body that seem to be 
weaker are indispensable, 23 and those parts of the body which we think 
less honorable we treat with the greater honor, and our unpresentable 
parts are treated with greater modesty, 24 while our more presentable 
members have no need of it. But God has so composed the body, giving 
the greater honor to the parts that lacked it, 25 so that there may be no 
division in the body, but that the members may have the same care for one 
another. 26 And if one member suffers, all the members suffer with it; if 
one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it. 
	27 Now you are the body of Christ, and individually members of 
it. 28 And God has appointed in the church first apostles, second 
prophets, third teachers, then workers of miracles, then those having gifts 
of healings, helps, administrations, and those speaking in various kinds of 
tongues. 29 Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all 
work miracles? 30 Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak with 
tongues? Do all interpret? 31 But earnestly desire the greater gifts. 
13
	And I will show you a still more excellent way.  1 If I speak in 
the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am a noisy gong or 
a clanging cymbal. 2 If I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all 
mysteries and all knowledge; and if I have all faith, so as to remove 
mountains, but have not love, I am nothing. 3 If I give all I have to the 
poor, and if I surrender my body to be burned, but have not love, I gain 
nothing. 
	4 Love is patient, love is kind. It is not jealous or boastful, it is 
not arrogant 5 or rude, it does not seek its own, it is not provoked, it 
keeps no record of wrongs, 6 it does not rejoice in evil, but rejoices with 
the truth. 7 Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, 
endures all things. 
	8 Love never fails; but where there are prophecies, they will 
cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is 
knowledge, it will pass away. 9 For we know in part and we prophesy in 
part; 10 but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away. 11 When I 
was a child, I spoke like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a 
child; when I became a man, I put childish ways behind me. 12 For now 
we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but 
then I shall know fully—even as I have been fully known. 13 So now 
faith, hope, love abide, these three; but the greatest of these is love.
14
	1 Pursue love, and earnestly desire the spiritual gifts, especially 
that you may prophesy. 2 For one who speaks in a tongue does not speak 
to men but to God; for no one understands him, but in his spirit he speaks 
mysteries. 3 But everyone who prophesies speaks to men for their 
edification and encouragement and comfort. 4 He who speaks in a tongue 
edifies himself, but he who prophesies edifies the church. 5 Now I want 
you all to speak in tongues, but even more that you would prophesy. He 
who prophesies is greater than he who speaks in tongues, unless some 
one interprets, so that the church may be edified. 6 But now, brethren, if I 
come to you speaking in tongues, what will I profit you unless I bring you 
some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or teaching? 7 If even lifeless 
things, such as the flute or the harp, do not give a distinction in the notes, 
how will any one know what is played? 8 And if the bugle gives an 
indistinct sound, who will get ready for battle? 9 So it is with you, unless 
you utter by the tongue speech that is intelligible, how will anyone know 
what is spoken? For you will be speaking into the air. 10 Undoubtedly 
there are many languages in the world, and none of them is without 
meaning. 11 If then I do not know the meaning of the language, I will be a 
foreigner to the one who is speaking, and the speaker will be a foreigner 
to me. 12 So it is with you; since you are eager for spiritual gifts, strive to 
excel in building up the church. 13 Therefore, he who speaks in a tongue 
should pray that he may interpret. 14 For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit 
prays, but my mind is unfruitful. 15 What am I to do? I will pray with the 
spirit and I will pray with the mind also; I will sing with the spirit and I 
will sing with the mind also. 16 Otherwise, if you bless with the spirit, 
how can any one in the position of an outsider say the "Amen" to your 
thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying? 17 For you 
may be giving thanks well enough, but the other man is not edified. 18 I 
thank God that I speak in tongues more than you all; 19 but in the church 
I would rather speak five words with my mind, to instruct others, than ten 
thousand words in a tongue. 
	20 Brethren, do not be children in your thinking; be infants in 
evil, but in thinking be mature. 21 In the law it is written, 
	"By men of strange tongues 
		and by the lips of foreigners 
	will I speak to this people, 
		and even then they will not listen to me, 
says the Lord." 22 Tongues, then, are a sign, not for believers but for 
unbelievers; but prophecy is for believers, not for unbelievers. 23 
Therefore if the whole church assembles together and all speak in 
tongues, and outsiders or unbelievers enter, will they not say that you are 
mad? 24 But if all prophesy, and an unbeliever or an outsider enters, he is 
convicted by all, he is called to account by all; 25 the secrets of his heart 
are disclosed; and so, he will fall on his face, and worship God, declaring 
that God is really among you. 
	26 What is the outcome then, brethren? When you come 
together, each one has a hymn, or a teaching, or a revelation, or a tongue, 
or an interpretation. Let all things be done for edification. 27 If anyone 
speaks in a tongue, it should be by two or at the most three, and each in 
turn; and one must interpret. 28 But if there is no interpreter, he must 
keep silent in the church; and let him speak to himself and to God. 29 Let 
two or three prophets speak, and let the others weigh what is said. 30 But 
if a revelation is made to another who is sitting, the first one must keep 
silent. 31 For you can all prophesy one by one, so that all may learn and 
all be encouraged; 32 and the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets. 
33 For God is not a God of confusion but of peace. 
	As in all the churches of the saints, 34 the women should keep 
silent in the churches. For they are not permitted to speak, but should be 
submissive, as even the law says. 35 If they desire to learn anything, let 
them ask their own husbands at home; for it is shameful for a woman to 
speak in church. 36 Did the word of God originate with you? Or are you 
the only people it has reached? 
	37 If anyone thinks he is a prophet or spiritual, let him 
acknowledge that what I am writing to you is the Lord's command. 38 But 
if anyone does not recognize this, he is not recognized. 39 Therefore, my 
brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in 
tongues. 40 But all things should be done decently and in an orderly way. 
15
	1 Now I would remind you, brethren, of the gospel I preached to 
you, which you received, in which you stand, 2 by which also you are 
saved, if you hold fast the word which I preached to you, unless you 
believed in vain. 3 For I delivered to you as of first importance what I also 
received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, 4 that 
he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the 
Scriptures, 5 and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. 6 After 
that he appeared to more than five hundred brethren at one time, most of 
whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep. 7 Then he appeared 
to James, then to all the apostles. 8 And last of all, as to one untimely 
born, he appeared to me also. 9 For I am the least of the apostles, and not 
fit to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. 10 But 
by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace toward me was not in 
vain. No, I worked harder than all of them—yet not I, but the grace of 
God that was with me. 11 Whether then it was I or they, so we preach and 
so you believed. 
	12 Now if Christ is preached that he has been raised from the 
dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? 
13 But if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has 
been raised; 14 if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain 
and so is your faith. 15 More than that, we are even found to be false 
witnesses of God, because we testified against God that he raised Christ, 
whom he did not raise, if in fact the dead are not raised. 16 For if the 
dead are not raised, then Christ has not been raised. 17 And if Christ has 
not been raised, your faith is futile; you are still in your sins. 18 Then 
those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. 19 If for this 
life only we have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most to be pitied. 
	20 But Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the first 
fruits of those who have fallen asleep. 21 For since by a man came death, 
by a man came also the resurrection of the dead. 22 For as in Adam all 
die, so also in Christ all will be made alive. 23 But each in his own order: 
Christ the first fruits, then, at his coming, those who belong to him. 24 
Then comes the end, when he hands over the kingdom to God the Father 
after he has destroyed all rule and all authority and power. 25 For he must 
reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. 26 The last enemy to 
be destroyed is death. 27 "For God has put all things in subjection under 
his feet." But when it says, "All things are put in subjection under him," 
it is plain that he is excepted who put all things under him. 28 When all 
things are subjected to him, then the Son himself will also be subjected to 
the one who put all things under him, that God may be all in all. 
	29 Otherwise, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? 
If the dead are not raised at all, why then are people baptized for them? 30 
Why are we also in danger every hour? 31 I protest, brethren, by my pride 
in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die every day. 
	32 If I fought wild beasts in Ephesus for merely human reasons, 
what have I gained? If the dead are not raised, 
	"Let us eat and drink, 
		for tomorrow we die." 
33 Do not be deceived: 
	"Bad company corrupts good morals." 
34 Come back to your senses as you ought, and stop sinning; for some 
have no knowledge of God. I say this to your shame. 
	35 But someone will ask, "How are the dead raised? With what 
kind of body do they come?" 36 You foolish man! What you sow does 
not come to life unless it dies. 37 And that which you sow, you do not 
sow the body which is to be, but a bare grain, perhaps of wheat or of 
something else. 38 But God gives it a body as he has determined, and to 
each kind of seed he gives its own body. 39 For not all flesh is the same 
flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of animals, 
another of birds, and another of fish. 40 There are also heavenly bodies 
and there are earthly bodies; but the glory of the heavenly is one, and the 
glory of the earthly is another. 41 There is one glory of the sun, and 
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for star differs 
from star in glory. 
	42 So is it with the resurrection of the dead. It is sown a 
perishable body, it is raised imperishable; 43 it is sown in dishonor, it is 
raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; 44 it is sown 
a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there 
is also a spiritual body. 45 So it is written, "The first man Adam became a 
living being"; the last Adam became a life-giving spirit. 46 However, the 
spiritual is not first, but the natural; and then the spiritual. 47 The first 
man was from the earth, of dust; the second man is from heaven. 48 As 
was the man of dust, so are those who are of the dust; and as is the man of 
heaven, so also are those who are of heaven. 49 Just as we have borne the 
image of the man of dust, we shall also bear the image of the man of 
heaven. 
	50 Now I tell you this, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the kingdom of God; nor does the perishable inherit the 
imperishable. 51 Behold, I tell you a mystery; we will not all sleep, but 
we will all be changed, 52 in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the 
last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised 
imperishable, and we will be changed. 53 For this perishable must put on 
the imperishable, and this mortal must put on immortality. 54 When the 
perishable puts on the imperishable, and the mortal puts on immortality, 
then will come to pass the saying that is written: 
	"Death is swallowed up in victory." 
55	"O death, where is your victory? 
		O death, where is your sting?" 
56 The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. 57 But 
thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
58 Therefore, my beloved brethren, be steadfast, immovable, always 
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain 
in the Lord. 
16
	1 Now concerning the collection for the saints: as I directed the 
churches of Galatia, so you must also do. 2 On the first day of every 
week, each one of you is to put something aside and store it up, as he may 
prosper, so that no collections be made when I come. 3 And when I arrive, 
I will send those whom you approve with letters to carry your gift to 
Jerusalem. 4 If it seems advisable for me to go also, they will accompany 
me. 
	5 But I will come to you after I go through Macedonia, for I am 
going through Macedonia; 6 and perhaps I will stay with you or even 
spend the winter, so that you may help me on my journey, wherever I go. 
7 For I do not want to see you now just in passing; I hope to spend some 
time with you, if the Lord permits. 8 But I will stay in Ephesus until 
Pentecost, 9 for a wide door for effective work has opened to me, and 
there are many adversaries. 
	10 Now if Timothy comes, see that he is with you with nothing 
to fear, for he is doing the work of the Lord, just as I am. 11 So let no one 
despise him. Send him on his way in peace, that he may return to me; for I 
am expecting him with the brethren. 
	12 As for our brother Apollos, I strongly urged him to come to 
you with the other brethren, but it was not at all his will to come now. He 
will come when he has opportunity. 
	13 Be on the your guard, stand firm in the faith, act like men, be 
strong. 14 Let all that you do be done in love. 
	15 You know that the household of Stephanas were the first 
converts in Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the service of the 
saints. Now I urge you, brethren, 16 to be subject to such men and to 
everyone who helps in the work and labors. 17 I rejoice at the coming of 
Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because they have supplied what 
was lacking on your part. 18 For they refreshed my spirit and yours also. 
Give recognition to such men. 
	19 The churches of Asia send you greetings. Aquila and Prisca 
greet you warmly in the lord, with the church that is in their house. 20 All 
the brethren send you greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss. 
	21 I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand. 22 If anyone does 
not love the Lord—let him be accursed. Come, O Lord! 23 The grace of 
The Lord Jesus be with you. 24 My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. 
Amen. 




First Corinthians, page 1
