Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The First Letter of 
Paul to Timothy 

1
	1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our 
Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope, 2 to Timothy, my true child in the 
faith: grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 
	3 As I urged you when I went into Macedonia, remain on at 
Ephesus so that you may instruct certain men not to teach strange 
doctrines, 4 nor to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies. 
These promote controversies rather than the divine training—which is by 
faith. 5 But the goal of our instruction is love from a pure heart and a 
good conscience and a sincere faith. 6 For some men have wandered away 
from these things and turned aside to fruitless discussion, 7 wanting to be 
teachers of the Law, even though they do not understand either what they 
are saying or the matters about which they make confident assertions. 
	8 But we know that the Law is good, if one uses it lawfully, 9 
realizing the fact that law is not made for a righteous person, but for those 
who are lawless and rebellious, for the ungodly and sinners, for the 
unholy and profane, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for 
murderers 10 and immoral men and homosexuals and kidnappers and liars 
and perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine, 11 
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, with which I have 
been entrusted. 
	12 I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has given me strength, 
because he considered me faithful, appointing me to his service. 13 Even 
though I was formerly a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent 
aggressor, I was shown mercy because I acted ignorantly in unbelief; 14 
and the grace of our Lord was overflowing for me, with the faith and love 
that are found in Christ Jesus. 15 It is a trustworthy saying that deserves 
full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners—of 
whom I am the foremost. 16 But I received mercy for this reason, so that 
in me, as the foremost, Jesus Christ might display his perfect patience for 
an example to those who would believe in him for eternal life. 17 Now to 
the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 
	18 I give you this command, Timothy, my son, in accordance 
with the prophecies once made about you, that by them you may fight the 
good fight, 19 holding faith and a good conscience, which some have 
rejected and made shipwreck of their faith. 20 Among them are 
Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan so that 
they will be taught not to blaspheme. 
2
	1 First of all, then, I urge that requests, prayers, intercessions, 
and thanksgivings be made for all men, 2 for kings and all who are in 
authority, so that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness 
and dignity. 3 This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 
4 who desires all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the 
truth. 5 For there is one God, and one mediator also between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, 6 who gave himself as a ransom for all—the 
testimony given at the proper time. 7 For this I was appointed a preacher 
and an apostle (I am telling the truth, I am not lying) as a teacher of the 
Gentiles in faith and truth. 
	8 Therefore I want the men in every place to pray, lifting up holy 
hands, without anger or quarreling. 9 I also want women to adorn 
themselves with proper clothing, modestly and sensibly, not with braided 
hair or gold or pearls or costly garments, 10 but with good deeds, as is 
proper for women who profess godliness. 11 Let a woman learn in silence 
with all submissiveness. 12 I do not permit a woman to teach or to have 
authority over a man; she must be silent. 13 For Adam was formed first, 
then Eve. 14 And it was not Adam who was deceived, but the woman was 
deceived and became a transgressor. 15 But women will be saved through 
the bearing of children, if they continue in faith and love and holiness 
with self-restraint. 
3
	1 It is a trustworthy saying: if any one aspires to the office of 
overseer, he desires a noble task. 2 Now the overseer must be above 
reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, 
hospitable, able to teach, 3 not given to drunkenness, not violent but 
gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money. 4 He must manage his own 
household well, keeping his children under control with all dignity 5 (If a 
man does not know how to manage his own household, how can he take 
care of God's church?). 6 He must not be a recent convert, or he may 
become conceited and fall into the same condemnation as the devil. 7 He 
must also have a good reputation with outsiders, so that he will not fall 
into reproach and the snare of the devil. 
	8 Deacons likewise must be men of dignity, not double-tongued, 
not addicted to much wine, and not fond of sordid gain; 9 they must hold 
the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience. 10 They must also first be 
tested; and then if they are beyond reproach, let them serve as deacons. 11 
The women must likewise be dignified, not malicious gossips, but 
temperate, faithful in all things. 12 Deacons must be the husband of one 
wife, and must manage their children and their households well. 13 For 
those who have served well as deacons gain for themselves a high 
standing and great confidence in the faith that is in Christ Jesus. 
	14 Although I hope to come to you soon, I am writing you these 
instructions so that, 15 if I am delayed, you will know how one ought to 
conduct himself in the household of God, which is the church of the 
living God, the pillar and support of the truth. 16 By common confession, 
great is the mystery of godliness: 
	he was revealed in the flesh, 
		was vindicated in the Spirit, 
			seen by angels, 
	preached among the nations, 
		believed on in the world, 
			taken up in glory. 
4
	1 Now the Spirit expressly says that in later times some will fall 
away from the faith by giving heed to deceitful spirits and doctrines of 
demons, 2 through the pretensions of liars, whose consciences have been 
seared as with a hot iron, 3 who forbid marriage and advocate abstaining 
from foods which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those 
who believe and know the truth. 4 For everything created by God is good, 
and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving; 5 for it is 
consecrated by the word of God and prayer. 
	6 If you point out these things to the brethren, you will be a 
good minister of Christ Jesus, constantly nourished on the words of the 
faith and of the good doctrine which you have followed. 7 Have nothing 
to do with godless myths and old wives' tales; rather, train yourself in 
godliness. 8 For bodily training is of some value, but godliness is of value 
in all things, as it holds promise for the present life and also for the life to 
come. 9 It is a trustworthy saying worthy of full acceptance. 10 For to this 
end we labor and strive, because we have our hope set on the living God, 
who is the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe. 
	11 Command and teach these things. 12 Let no one look down 
on your youth, but set the believers an example in speech and conduct, in 
love, in faith, in purity. 13 Until I come, devote yourself to the public 
reading of Scripture, to preaching and to teaching. 14 Do not neglect the 
gift you have, which was given you through prophetic utterance when the 
council of elders laid their hands on you. 15 Be diligent in these matters; 
give yourself wholly to them, so that all may see your progress. 16 Take 
heed to yourself and to your teaching; persevere in them, for if you do, 
you will save both yourself and your hearers. 
5
	1 Do not rebuke an older man, but exhort him as a father, 
younger men as brothers, 2 older women as mothers, and younger women 
as sisters, in all purity. 
	3 Honor widows who are real widows. 4 But if a widow has 
children or grandchildren, they must first learn to practice their religion in 
regard to their own family and to make some return to their parents; for 
this is acceptable in the sight of God. 5 Now she who is a real widow, and 
who has been left all alone, has set her hope on God and continues in 
supplications and prayers night and day. 6 But she who lives for pleasure 
is dead even while she lives. 7 Command these things as well, so that they 
may be above reproach. 8 If any one does not provide for his relatives, and 
especially for his own family, he has denied the faith and is worse than an 
unbeliever. 9 A widow is to be put on the list only if she is not less than 
sixty years old, having been the wife of one husband, 10 and she must be 
well known for her good deeds, as one who has brought up children, 
shown hospitality, washed the feet of the saints, relieved those in distress, 
and devoted herself to doing good in every way. 11 But refuse to put 
younger widows on the list, for when they feel sensual desires in 
disregard of Christ, they want to marry, 12 thus bringing condemnation, 
because they have set aside their first pledge. 13 Besides, they learn to be 
idle, going about from house to house. And not only do they become 
idlers, but also gossips and busybodies, saying things they ought not to. 
14 So I would have younger widows marry, bear children, manage their 
homes, and give the enemy no occasion for reproach. 15 For some have 
already turned aside to follow Satan. 16 If any woman who is a believer 
has dependent widows, she must assist them, and let not the church be 
burdened, so that it may assist those who are real widows. 
	17 The elders who rule well are to be considered worthy of 
double honor, especially those who work hard at preaching and teaching. 
18 For the scripture says, "You shall not muzzle an ox while it is treading 
out the grain," and, "The laborer deserves his wages." 19 Do not receive 
an accusation against an elder except on the basis of two or three 
witnesses. 20 Those who continue in sin, rebuke in the presence of all, so 
that the rest also may be fearful of sinning. 21 I charge you, in the 
presence of God and of Christ Jesus and of the elect angels, to keep these 
instructions without partiality, doing nothing out of favoritism. 22 Do not 
be hasty in the laying on of hands, and do not share in the sins of others; 
keep yourself pure. 23 No longer drink only water, but use a little wine 
for the sake of your stomach and your frequent ailments. 
	24 The sins of some men are obvious, going before them to 
judgment; for others, their sins appear later. 25 In the same way, good 
deeds are obvious, and even those that are not cannot be hidden. 
6
	1 Let all who are under the yoke of slavery regard their masters 
as worthy of all honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may not 
be spoken against. 2 Those who have believing masters must not be 
disrespectful to them because they are brethren, but they must serve them 
all the better, because those who benefit by their service are believers and 
beloved. 
	Teach and urge these duties. 3 If anyone teaches otherwise and 
does not agree with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and the 
teaching which accords with godliness, 4 he is conceited and understands 
nothing; but he has a morbid interest in controversial questions and 
disputes about words, which produce envy, strife, malicious talk, evil 
suspicions, 5 and constant friction between men of depraved mind and 
deprived of the truth, who imagine that godliness is a means of gain. 6 
But godliness with contentment is itself great gain. 7 For we brought 
nothing into the world, and we cannot take anything out of it. 8 But if we 
have food and clothing, with these we shall be content. 9 But those who 
want to get rich fall into temptation and a snare and into many foolish and 
harmful desires that plunge men into ruin and destruction. 10 For the love 
of money is a root of all sorts of evil, and some by longing for it have 
wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs. 
	11 But you, man of God, flee from all this, and pursue 
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, endurance and gentleness. 12 Fight 
the good fight of the faith; take hold of the eternal life to which you were 
called when you made the good confession in the presence of many 
witnesses. 13 I charge you in the presence of God, who gives life to all 
things, and of Christ Jesus, who made the good confession before Pontius 
Pilate, 14 to keep the commandment without stain or reproach until the 
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 15 which he will bring about at the 
proper time—he who is the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings 
and Lord of lords, 16 who alone has immortality and dwells in 
unapproachable light, whom no man has ever seen or can see. To him be 
honor and eternal dominion. Amen. 
	17 Instruct those who are rich in this present world not to be 
conceited or to fix their hope on the uncertainty of riches, but on God, 
who richly supplies us with everything to enjoy. 18 Instruct them to do 
good, to be rich in good deeds, to be generous and ready to share, 19 
storing up for themselves the treasure of a good foundation for the future, 
so that they may take hold of that life which is life indeed. 
	20 O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid 
godless chatter and the opposing ideas of what is falsely called 
knowledge, 21 which some have professed and in so doing have wandered 
from the faith. 
	Grace be with you. 

First Timothy, page 1
