Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The Second Letter 
of Paul to Timothy

1
	1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, according 
to the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus, 2 to Timothy, my beloved 
son: grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 
	3 I thank God, whom I serve with a clear conscience the way my 
forefathers did, as I constantly remember you in my prayers night and day. 
4 As I recall your tears, I long to see you, so that I may be filled with joy. 
5 For I am reminded of your sincere faith, which first dwelt in your 
grandmother Lois, and your mother Eunice, and I am sure is in you as 
well. 6 For this reason I remind you to fan into flame the gift of God 
which is in you through the laying on of my hands. 7 For God did not 
give us a spirit of timidity, but a spirit of power and love and self-
discipline. 8 So do not be ashamed to testify of our Lord or of me his 
prisoner, but join with me in suffering for the gospel according to the 
power of God, 9 who has saved us and called us with a holy calling, not 
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and the grace 
which was granted us in Christ Jesus from all eternity, 10 but has now 
been revealed through the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the 
gospel. 11 For this gospel I was appointed a preacher and an apostle and a 
teacher. 12 For this reason I also suffer as I do. But I am not ashamed, for 
I know whom I have believed and I am convinced that he is able to guard 
what I have entrusted to him until that day. 13 Follow the pattern of 
sound words which you have heard from me, in the faith and love which 
are in Christ Jesus. 14 Guard, through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us, 
the treasure that has been entrusted to you. 
	15 You are aware of the fact that all who are in Asia turned away 
from me, among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes. 16 May the Lord 
grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me 
and was not ashamed of my chains; 17 but when he was in Rome, he 
eagerly searched for me and found me—18 may the Lord grant him to find 
mercy from the Lord on that Day—and you know very well all the service 
he rendered at Ephesus. 
2
	1 You then, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ 
Jesus. 2 And the things you have heard from me in the presence of many 
witnesses, entrust to faithful men who will be able to teach others also. 3 
Share in hardship as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. 4 No soldier in active 
service gets entangled in civilian affairs, since his aim is to please the one 
who enlisted him as a soldier. 5 Also if anyone competes as an athlete, he 
does not win the prize unless he competes according to the rules. 6 The 
hard-working farmer ought to be the first to receive his share of the crops. 
7 Consider what I say, for the Lord will give you understanding in 
everything. 
	8 Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, descended from 
David according to my gospel, 9 for which I am suffering even to the 
point of wearing chains like a criminal. But the word of God is not 
chained. 10 Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the elect, that 
they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal 
glory. 11 Here is a trustworthy saying: 
	if we died with him, we will also live with him; 
12	if we endure, we will also reign with him; 
	if we deny him, he also will deny us; 
13	if we are faithless, he remains faithful, 
		for he cannot deny himself. 
	14 Remind them of these things, and charge them in the presence 
of God to avoid disputing about words, which does no good, but only 
ruins the hearers. 15 Do your best to present yourself to God as one 
approved, a workman who does not need to be ashamed, rightly handling 
the word of truth. 16 Avoid godless chatter, for it will lead people into 
more and more ungodliness, 17 and their talk will spread like gangrene. 
Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus, 18 who have gone astray from 
the truth. They say that the resurrection has already taken place, and upset 
the faith of some. 19 Nevertheless, God's firm foundation stands, having 
this seal: "The Lord knows those who are his," and, "Everyone who 
names the name of the Lord must turn away from wickedness." 20 In a 
large house there are not only vessels of gold and silver but also of wood 
and earthenware, and some for noble use, some for ignoble. 21 If anyone 
cleanses himself from what is ignoble, he will be a vessel for noble 
purposes, made holy, useful to the Master and prepared to do any good 
work. 22 Now flee from youthful lusts, and pursue righteousness, faith, 
love and peace, along with those who call on the Lord from a pure heart. 
23 Don't have anything to do with foolish and stupid arguments, because 
you know that they produce quarrels. 24 And the Lord's servant must not 
be quarrelsome, but he must be kind to everyone, able to teach, patient 
when wronged, 25 with gentleness correcting those who are in 
opposition, if perhaps God will grant them repentance leading to the 
knowledge of the truth, 26 and they may come to their senses and escape 
from the snare of the devil, having been held captive by him to do his will. 
3
	1 But understand this, that in the last days there will come times 
of stress. 2 For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, 
arrogant, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy, 3 
unloving, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, haters of 
good, 4 treacherous, reckless, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than 
lovers of God, 5 holding a form of godliness but denying its power. Avoid 
such people. 6 For among them are those who make their way into 
households and capture weak women, weighed down with sins and 
swayed by various impulses, 7 always learning and never able to come to 
the knowledge of the truth. 8 Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, 
so these men also oppose the truth, men of depraved mind, rejected in 
regard to the faith. 9 But they will not get very far, for their folly will be 
plain to all, as was that of those two men. 
	10 You, however, know all about my teaching, my conduct, my 
purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance, 11 persecutions, and sufferings, 
such as happened to me at Antioch, at Iconium and at Lystra; what 
persecutions I endured, yet the Lord rescued me from them all. 12 Indeed 
all who desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted, 13 
while evil men and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving and 
being deceived. 14 But as for you, continue in what you have learned and 
have become convinced of, knowing from whom you learned it, 15 and 
how from childhood you have known the sacred writings which are able 
to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. 16 All 
scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for 
correction, and for training in righteousness; 17 so that the man of God 
may be complete, equipped for every good work. 
4
	1 I solemnly charge you in the presence of God and of Christ 
Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing and 
his kingdom: 2 preach the word; be ready in season and out of season; 
correct, rebuke, and exhort, with great patience and instruction. 3 For the 
time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but having 
itching ears, they will accumulate for themselves teachers to suit their 
own desires, 4 and will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside 
to myths. 5 But you, be sober in all things, endure hardship, do the work 
of an evangelist, fulfill your ministry. 
	6 For I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the 
time of my departure has come. 7 I have fought the good fight, I have 
finished the race, I have kept the faith. 8 In the future there is laid up for 
me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will 
award to me on that day; and not only to me, but also to all who have 
loved his appearing. 
	9 Do your best to come to me soon; 10 for Demas, having loved 
this present world, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica. Crescens 
has gone to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia. 11 Only Luke is with me. Get 
Mark and bring him with you, for he is useful to me in my ministry. 12 
But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus. 13 When you come, bring the cloak 
that I left with Carpus at Troas, and the books, especially the parchments. 
14 Alexander the coppersmith did me great harm; the Lord will repay him 
for his deeds. 15 Be on guard against him yourself, for he strongly 
opposed our message. 
	16 At my first defense no one came to my support, but all 
deserted me; may it not be counted against them. 17 But the Lord stood at 
my side and gave me strength, so that through me the message might be 
fully proclaimed and all the Gentiles might hear it. And I was rescued 
from the lion's mouth. 18 The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack 
and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory for 
ever and ever. Amen. 
	19 Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus. 
20 Erastus remained at Corinth, but Trophimus I left sick at Miletus. 21 
Do your best to come before winter. Eubulus greets you, and so do 
Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brethren. 22 The Lord be with 
your spirit. Grace be with you. 



Second Timothy, page 1
