Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The Second Letter 
of Paul to the 
Corinthians

1
	1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and 
Timothy our brother, to the church of God which is at Corinth, with all 
the saints who are throughout Achaia: 2 grace and peace to you from God 
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
	3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of mercies and the God of all comfort, 4 who comforts us in all our 
affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any 
affliction, with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by 
God. 5 For just as the sufferings of Christ flow over into our lives, so also 
through Christ our comfort overflows. 6 If we are afflicted, it is for your 
comfort and salvation; and if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, 
which is effective in the patient enduring of the same sufferings that we 
suffer. 7 And our hope for you is firm, because we know that just as you 
share in our sufferings, so also you share in our comfort. 
	8 For we do not want you to be ignorant, brethren, of our 
affliction which came to us in Asia: that we were burdened beyond 
measure, above strength, so that we despaired even of life. 9 Indeed, we 
felt that we had received the sentence of death. But this happened that we 
might not rely on ourselves but on God, who raises the dead. 10 He 
delivered us from so deadly a peril, and he will deliver us; on him we have 
set our hope that he will deliver us again. 11 You also must help us by 
your prayers, so that many will give thanks on our behalf for the blessing 
granted us in answer to the prayers of many. 
	12 For our boast is this: the testimony of our conscience, that 
with holiness and godly sincerity, not in worldly wisdom but in the grace 
of God, we have conducted ourselves in the world, and still more toward 
you. 13 For we write you nothing but what you can read and understand; 
and I hope you will understand fully, 14 as you have understood us in 
part, that you can be proud of us just as we can be of you, in the day of 
the Lord Jesus. 
	15 Because I was sure of this, I wanted to come to you first, so 
that you might have a double benefit. 16 I planned to visit you on my way 
to Macedonia and to come back to you from Macedonia, and then to have 
you send me on my way to Judea. 17 When I was planning this, did I do it 
lightly? Or do I make my plans in a fleshly manner so that in the same 
breath I say, "Yes, Yes" and "No, No"? 18 But as surely as God is 
faithful, our word to you has not been Yes and No. 19 For the Son of 
God, Christ Jesus, who was preached among you by us—by me and 
Silvanus and Timothy—was not Yes and No, but in him it has always 
been Yes. 20 For as many as are the promises of God, in him they are 
Yes. And so through him we speak our Amen to the glory of God. 21 
Now it is God who establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us; 
22 he has put his seal on us and given us his Spirit in our hearts as a 
guarantee. 
	23 But I call God as my witness that it was in order to spare you 
that I did not return to Corinth. 24 Not that we lord it over your faith; but 
we work with you for your joy, for you stand firm in your faith. 
2
1 So I made up my mind that I would not make another painful visit to 
you. 2 For if I cause you pain, who is there to make me glad but the one 
whom I have pained? 3 And I wrote as I did, so that when I came I might 
not suffer pain from those who should have made me rejoice, for I had 
confidence in all of you, that my joy would be the joy of you all. 4 For I 
wrote you out of much affliction and anguish of heart and with many 
tears, not to cause you pain but to let you know the abundant love that I 
have for you. 
	5 But if any one has caused pain, he has caused it not to me, but 
in some measure—not to put it too severely—to all of you. 6 Sufficient 
for such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by the majority, 7 
so you should rather turn to forgive and comfort him, so that he will not 
be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow. 8 I urge you, therefore, to reaffirm 
your love for him. 9 For this is why I wrote, that I might test you and 
know whether you are obedient in everything. 10 Any one whom you 
forgive, I also forgive. What I have forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, 
has been for your sake in the presence of Christ, 11 in order that Satan 
might gain no advantage over us; for we are not ignorant of his schemes. 
	12 Now when I came to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ and 
when a door was opened for me in the Lord, 13 I still had no rest in my 
mind, because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I took my leave of 
them and went on to Macedonia. 
	14 But thanks be to God, who in Christ always leads us in 
triumph, and through us spreads the fragrance of the knowledge of him 
everywhere. 15 For we are the aroma of Christ to God among those who 
are being saved and among those who are perishing, 16 to the one a 
fragrance from death to death, to the other a fragrance from life to life. 
And who is sufficient for these things? 17 For we are not, like so many, 
peddling the word of God; but as men of sincerity, as from God, in the 
sight of God we speak in Christ. 
3
	1 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we 
need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you, or from you? 2 You 
yourselves are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read by all 
men. 3 You show that you are a letter from Christ, delivered by us, 
written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of 
stone but on tablets of carnal hearts. 
	4 Such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward 
God. 5 Not that we are competent of ourselves to claim anything as 
coming from ourselves; but our competence is from God, 6 who has made 
us competent as ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter but of the 
Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. 
	7 Now if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in 
letters on stone, came with glory, so that the Israelites could not look 
steadily at the face of Moses because of its glory, fading though it was, 8 
will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more glorious? 9 For if the 
ministry of condemnation has glory, much more does the ministry of 
righteousness exceed it in glory. 10 For indeed what had glory, in this 
case has no glory because of the glory that surpasses it. 11 For if what 
was fading away came with glory, much more is the glory of that which 
lasts. 
	12 Therefore, since we have such a hope, we are very bold. 13 
We are not like Moses, who would put a veil over his face to keep the 
Israelites from gazing at the end of the radiance that was fading away. 14 
But their minds were hardened; for to this day, when they read the old 
covenant, the same veil remains unlifted, because only in Christ is it 
removed. 15 Even to this day when Moses is read, a veil lies over their 
hearts. 16 But whenever a person turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away. 
17 Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is 
freedom. 18 And we all, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the 
Lord, are being transformed into his likeness from one degree of glory to 
another, for this comes from the Lord who is the Spirit. 
4
	1 Therefore, since we have this ministry, as we have received 
mercy, we do not lose heart. 2 But we have renounced secret and 
shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of 
God. On the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend 
ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. 3 And even if our 
gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing. 4 In their case the 
god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, so that they 
might not see the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the 
image of God. 5 For we do not preach ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, 
and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake. 6 For it is the God who 
said, "Let light shine out of darkness," who has shone in our hearts to 
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ. 
	7 But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, to show that this 
all-surpassing power is from God and not from us. 8 We are hard pressed 
on every side, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair; 9 
persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not destroyed; 10 always 
carrying about in the body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus also 
may be manifested in our body. 11 For we who live are always being 
given up to death for Jesus' sake, so that the life of Jesus may be 
manifested in our mortal flesh. 12 So then death is at work in us, but life 
in you. 13 Since we have the same spirit of faith, according to what is 
written, "I believed and therefore I spoke," we also believe and therefore 
speak, 14 knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also 
with Jesus and bring us with you into his presence. 15 For all this is for 
your benefit, so that the grace that is reaching more and more people may 
cause thanksgiving to overflow to the glory of God. 
	16 Therefore we do not lose heart. Though our outer nature is 
wasting away, yet our inner nature is being renewed day by day. 17 For 
our light and momentary affliction is producing for us an eternal weight 
of glory far beyond all comparison, 18 while we look not at the things 
which are seen, but at the things which are unseen; for the things which 
are seen are temporary, but the things which are unseen are eternal. 
5
	1 For we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we 
have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the 
heavens. 2 Here indeed we groan, longing to be clothed with our heavenly 
dwelling, 3 so that when we are clothed, we will not be found naked. 4 
For while we are in this tent, we groan and are burdened, because we do 
not wish to be unclothed, but to be further clothed, so that what is mortal 
may be swallowed up by life. 5 Now he who has prepared us for this very 
thing is God, who also has given us the Spirit as a guarantee. 
	6 Therefore we are always of good courage; and we know that 
while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord, 7 for we 
walk by faith, not by sight. 8 We are confident, I say, and would rather be 
away from the body and at home with the Lord. 9 So whether we are at 
home or away, we make it our aim to please him. 10 For we must all 
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive the 
things done in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or 
bad. 
	11 Therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord, we persuade men; 
but what we are is known to God, and I hope it is known also to your 
conscience. 12 We are not again commending ourselves to you, but are 
giving you an occasion to be proud of us, so that you may have an answer 
for those who take pride in appearance and not in heart. 13 For if we are 
beside ourselves, it is for God; if we are in our right mind, it is for you. 14 
For the love of Christ controls us, because we are convinced that one has 
died for all; therefore all have died. 15 And he died for all, that those who 
live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them 
and was raised again. 
	16 From now on, therefore, we regard no one from a fleshly 
point of view; even though we once regarded Christ from a fleshly point 
of view, we regard him thus no longer. 17 Therefore, if any one is in 
Christ, he is a new creation; the old has passed away, behold, the new has 
come. 18 All this is from God, who through Christ reconciled us to 
himself and gave us the ministry of reconciliation; 19 that is, God was in 
Christ reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses 
against them, and he has committed to us the message of reconciliation. 
20 We are therefore ambassadors for Christ, as though God were making 
his appeal through us. We beg you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to 
God. 21 For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in 
him we might become the righteousness of God. 
6
1 Working together with him, then, we urge you not to receive the grace 
of God in vain. 2 For he says, 
	"At the acceptable time I have listened to you, 
		and helped you on the day of salvation." 
Behold, now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation. 3 
We put no stumbling block in anyone's path, so that our ministry will not 
be discredited. 4 But as servants of God we commend ourselves in every 
way: through great endurance, in afflictions, hardships, distresses, 5 in 
beatings, imprisonments, tumults, labors, sleeplessness, hunger, 6 in 
purity, knowledge, patience, kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in genuine love, 
7 in truthful speech, and in the power of God; with the weapons of 
righteousness for the right hand and for the left; 8 through glory and 
dishonor, evil report and good report; true, yet regarded as impostors; 9 as 
unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we live; as punished, 
and yet not killed; 10 as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet 
making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing everything. 
	11 Our mouth has spoken freely to you, O Corinthians. Our 
heart is opened wide. 12 You are not restricted by us, but you are 
restricted in your own affections. 13 Now in a fair exchange—I speak as 
to my children—open wide your hearts also. 
	14 Do not be yoked together with unbelievers. For what 
partnership have righteousness and lawlessness? Or what fellowship has 
light with darkness? 15 What harmony has Christ with Belial? Or what 
has a believer in common with an unbeliever? 16 What agreement has the 
temple of God with idols? For we are the temple of the living God; as 
God said, 
	"I will live in them and walk among them, 
		and I will be their God, 
		and they shall be my people. 
17	Therefore come out from them 
		and be separate, says the Lord. 
	Touch no unclean thing, 
		and I will receive you. 
18	And I will be a father to you, 
		and you shall be my sons and daughters, 
	says the Lord Almighty."
7
	1 Since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves 
from every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of 
God. 
	2 Make room for us in your hearts; we have wronged no one, we 
have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one. 3 I do not say 
this to condemn you, for I have said before that you are in our hearts, to 
die together and to live together. 4 I have great confidence in you; I have 
great pride in you; I am filled with comfort. With all our affliction, I am 
overflowing with joy. 
	5 For even when we came into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, 
but we were afflicted at every turn—conflicts on the outside and fears 
within. 6 But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the 
coming of Titus, 7 and not only by his coming but also by the comfort 
with which he was comforted in you, as he told us of your longing, your 
mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced still more. 8 For even if I 
made you sorry with my letter, I do not regret it. Though I did regret it—
for I see that my letter hurt you, though only for a little while—9 now I 
rejoice, not because you were made sorry, but because your sorrow led 
you to repentance; for you became sorrowful as God intended, so that you 
suffered no loss through us. 10 For godly sorrow produces a repentance 
that leads to salvation and brings no regret, but worldly sorrow produces 
death. 11 For behold what this very thing, godly sorrow, has produced in 
you: what earnestness, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what 
indignation, what alarm, what longing, what zeal, what readiness to see 
justice done! At every point you have proved yourselves to be innocent in 
this matter. 12 So although I wrote to you, it was not on account of the 
one who did the wrong, nor on account of the one who suffered the 
wrong, but in order that your zeal for us might be revealed to you in the 
sight of God. 13 Therefore we are comforted. 
	And besides our own comfort, we rejoiced still more at the joy of 
Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all. 14 For if I have 
boasted to him about you, I was not put to shame; but just as everything 
we said to you was true, so our boasting before Titus has proved true. 15 
And his affection goes out all the more to you, as he remembers the 
obedience of you all, how you received him with fear and trembling. 16 I 
rejoice, because I have perfect confidence in you. 
8
	1 Now, brethren, we want you to know about the grace of God 
which has been given in the churches of Macedonia, 2 for in a severe test 
of affliction, their abundance of joy and their extreme poverty have 
overflowed in the wealth of their liberality. 3 For I testify that according 
to their ability, and even beyond their ability, they gave of their own free 
will, 4 urgently pleading with us for the privilege of sharing in the relief 
of the saints. 5 And they did not do as we expected, but they first gave 
themselves to the Lord and to us by the will of God. 6 So we urged Titus 
that as he had previously made a beginning, he would also complete in 
you this work of grace. 7 But as you excel in everything—in faith, in 
utterance, in knowledge, in all earnestness, and in your love for us—see 
that you excel in this work of grace also. 
	8 I am not speaking this as a command, but I want to test the 
sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others. 9 
For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, 
yet for your sakes he became poor, so that through his poverty you might 
become rich. 10 And in this matter I give my advice: it is best for you now 
to complete what a year ago you began not only to do but to desire. 11 
Now finish the work, so that your readiness to do it may be matched by 
your completion of it, according to your means. 12 For if the readiness is 
there, it is acceptable according to what a man has, not according to what 
he does not have. 13 For I do not mean that others should be eased and 
you burdened; 14 but at the present time your abundance should supply 
their need, so that their abundance may supply your need, that there may 
be equality. 15 As it is written, 
	"He who gathered much had nothing left over, 
		and he who gathered little had no lack." 
	16 But thanks be to God who puts the same earnest care for you 
into the heart of Titus. 17 For he not only accepted our appeal, but being 
himself very earnest he is going to you of his own accord. 18 And we are 
sending along with him the brother who is praised by all the churches for 
his preaching of the gospel; 19 and not only that, but he has been 
appointed by the churches to travel with us in this gracious work which 
we are carrying on, for the glory of the Lord himself and to show our 
good will. 20 We intend that no one should blame us about this liberal 
gift which we are administering, 21 for we have regard for what is 
honorable, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men. 
22 And with them we are sending our brother whom we have often proved 
diligent in many matters, but who is now more diligent than ever because 
of his great confidence in you. 23 As for Titus, he is my partner and 
fellow worker among you; and as for our brethren, they are messengers of 
the churches, a glory to Christ. 24 Therefore openly before the churches, 
show these men the proof of your love and the reason for our boasting 
about you. 
9
	1 Now it is superfluous for me to write to you about the offering 
for the saints, 2 for I know your readiness, of which I boast about you to 
the Macedonians, saying that Achaia has been ready since last year; and 
your zeal has stirred up most of them. 3 But I am sending the brethren so 
that our boasting about you may not prove vain in this case, so that you 
may be ready, as I said you would be; 4 lest if any Macedonians come 
with me and find you unprepared, we—not to say anything about you—
would be ashamed of having been so confident. 5 So I thought it 
necessary to urge the brethren to go on to you before me, and arrange in 
advance for this gift you have promised, so that it may be ready not as an 
exaction but as a willing gift. 
	6 The point is this: he who sows sparingly will also reap 
sparingly, and he who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully. 7 Each 
one must give just as he has purposed in his heart, not reluctantly or 
under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver. 8 And God is able to 
make all grace abound toward you, so that you, always having all 
sufficiency in everything, may have an abundance for every good work. 9 
As it is written, 
	"He has scattered abroad, he gives to the poor; 
		his righteousness endures forever." 
10 Now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will also 
supply and increase your store of seed and will multiply the harvest of 
your righteousness. 11 You will be enriched in every way for great 
generosity, which through us will produce thanksgiving to God. 12 For 
the ministry of this service is not only fully supplying the needs of the 
saints, but is also overflowing through many thanksgivings to God. 13 
Because of the test of this service, you will glorify God by your obedience 
in your confession of the gospel of Christ, and by the generosity of your 
contribution for them and for all others; 14 while they long for you and 
pray for you, because of the surpassing grace of God in you. 15 Thanks be 
to God for his indescribable gift! 
10
	1 I, Paul, myself urge you, by the meekness and gentleness of 
Christ—I who am humble when face to face with you, but bold to you 
when I am away!—2 I beg you that when I am present I may not have to be 
bold with that confidence by which I intend to be bold against some, who 
think of us as if we walked according to the flesh. 3 For though we live in 
the flesh, we do not wage war as the flesh does. 4 For the weapons of our 
warfare are not the weapons of the world, but they have divine power to 
destroy strongholds. 5 We demolish arguments and every pretension that 
sets itself up against the knowledge of God, and we take captive every 
thought to make it obedient to Christ, 6 and we are ready to punish every 
disobedience, whenever your obedience is complete. 
	7 You look at things as they are outwardly. If anyone is 
confident in himself that he is Christ's, let him consider this again within 
himself, that just as he is Christ's, so also are we. 8 For even if I boast 
somewhat further about our authority, which the Lord gave for building 
you up and not for destroying you, I shall not be put to shame. 9 I do not 
wish to seem as if I would terrify you by my letters. 10 For they say, "His 
letters are weighty and strong, but his personal presence is weak, and his 
speech of no account." 11 Let such people realize that what we are in our 
letters when we are absent, we will be in our actions when we are present. 
	12 For we do not dare to class or compare ourselves with some 
of those who commend themselves. But when they measure themselves by 
themselves, and compare themselves with themselves, they are without 
understanding. 13 But we will not boast beyond proper limits, but will 
confine our boasting to the field God has apportioned to us, a field that 
reaches even to you. 14 For we are not overextending ourselves, as if we 
did not reach to you; we were the first to come even as far as you with the 
gospel of Christ. 15 We do not go beyond limits by boasting in other 
men's labors, but our hope is that as your faith grows, our sphere among 
you may be greatly enlarged, 16 so that we can preach the gospel in the 
regions beyond you. For we do not want to boast of work already done in 
another man's territory. 17 But, "Let him who boasts boast in the Lord." 
18 For it is not he who commends himself that is approved, but he whom 
the Lord commends. 
11
	1 I wish that you would bear with me in a little foolishness; but 
indeed you are bearing with me. 2 I am jealous for you with a godly 
jealousy; for I betrothed you to one husband, so that to Christ I might 
present you as a pure virgin. 3 But I am afraid that just as the serpent 
deceived Eve by his cunning, your minds may somehow be led astray from 
your sincere and pure devotion to Christ. 4 For if someone comes to you 
and preaches a Jesus other than the one we preached, or if you receive a 
different spirit from the one you received, or a different gospel from the 
one you accepted, you put up with it easily enough. 5 I think that I am not 
in the least inferior to these super-apostles. 6 But even if I am unskilled in 
speech, I am not in knowledge; in every way we have made this plain to 
you in all things. 
	7 Or did I commit a sin in humbling myself that you might be 
exalted, because I preached the gospel of God to you without charge? 8 I 
robbed other churches by accepting support from them in order to serve 
you. 9 And when I was with you and needed something, I was not a 
burden to anyone, for the brethren who came from Macedonia supplied 
what I needed. I have kept myself from being a burden to you in any way, 
and will continue to do so. 10 As the truth of Christ is in me, this 
boasting of mine will not be stopped in the regions of Achaia. 11 Why? 
Because I do not love you? God knows I do! 
	12 And what I am doing, I will also continue to do, in order to 
cut the ground from under those who want an opportunity to be 
considered equal with us in the things of which they boast. 13 For such 
men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, disguising themselves as 
apostles of Christ. 14 And no wonder, for even Satan disguises himself as 
an angel of light. 15 Therefore it is not surprising if his servants also 
disguise themselves as servants of righteousness. Their end will be 
according to their deeds. 
	16 I repeat, let no one think me foolish; but even if you do, 
receive me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little. 17 What I am saying I 
am not saying as the Lord would, but as a fool, in this confidence of 
boasting. 18 Since many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast. 19 
For you put up with fools gladly, being so wise yourselves! 20 For you 
put up with anyone if he makes slaves of you, or preys upon you, or takes 
advantage of you, or exalts himself, or strikes you in the face. 21 To my 
shame, I must say that we were too weak for that! But whatever anyone 
else dares to boast about—I am speaking as a fool—I also dare to boast 
about. 22 Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are 
they descendants of Abraham? So am I. 23 Are they servants of Christ? I 
am a better one—I am talking like a madman—in far more labors, in far 
more imprisonments, with more beatings, and often in danger of death. 24 
Five times I received from the Jews the forty lashes minus one. 25 Three 
times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I was 
shipwrecked, a night and a day I have spent in the open sea. 26 I have 
been on frequent journeys, in danger from rivers, in danger from robbers, 
in danger from my own countrymen, in danger from Gentiles, in danger in 
the city, in danger in the wilderness, in danger at sea, and in danger from 
false brethren; 27 I have been in labor and hardship, through many 
sleepless nights, in hunger and thirst, often without food, in cold and 
exposure. 28 Besides such external things, there is the daily pressure on 
me of concern for all the churches. 29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? 
Who is made to fall, and I do not inwardly burn? 
	30 If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my 
weakness. 31 The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, he who is blessed 
forever, knows that I am not lying. 32 In Damascus the governor under 
King Aretas had the city of the Damascenes guarded in order to arrest me, 
33 but I was let down in a basket through a window in the wall, and 
escaped his hands. 
12
	1 I must go on boasting, though there is nothing to be gained by 
it; but I will go on to visions and revelations of the Lord. 2 I know a man 
in Christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven. 
Whether it was in the body or out of the body I do not know—God 
knows. 3 And I know that this man—whether in the body or apart from 
the body I do not know, but God knows—4 was caught up to paradise 
and heard inexpressible things, which a man is not permitted to tell. 5 On 
behalf of such a man I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, 
except of my weaknesses. 6 Though if I should boast, I will not be a fool, 
for I will be speaking the truth. But I refrain from it, so that no one may 
think more of me than he sees in me or hears from me. 7 And to keep me 
from being too elated because of the abundance of revelations, there was 
given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan, to harass me, to 
keep me from being too elated. 8 Three times I pleaded with the Lord 
about this, that it should depart from me. 9 But he said to me, "My grace 
is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness." 
Therefore I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that 
the power of Christ may rest on me. 10 That is why, for Christ's sake, I am 
content in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in 
difficulties; for when I am weak, then I am strong. 
	11 I have been a fool! You forced me to it, for I ought to have 
been commended by you. For I was not in the least inferior to these super-
apostles, even though I am nothing. 12 The signs of a true apostle were 
performed among you in all perseverance, with signs and wonders and 
mighty works. 13 For in what respect were you inferior to the rest of the 
churches, except that I myself did not become a burden to you? Forgive 
me this wrong! 14 Here for the third time I am ready to come to you. And 
I will not be a burden to you, for I seek not what is yours but you; for 
children ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their 
children. 15 I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls. If I love 
you the more, am I to be loved the less? 16 But be that as it may, I did not 
burden you myself. Yet, crafty fellow that I am, I caught you by trickery! 
17 Did I take advantage of you through any of those whom I sent to you? 
18 I urged Titus to go, and I sent the brother with him. Titus did not take 
advantage of you, did he? Did we not act in the same spirit and walk in 
the same steps? 
	19 Have you been thinking all along that we have been defending 
ourselves before you? It is in the sight of God that we have been speaking 
in Christ, and all for your upbuilding, beloved. 20 For I am afraid that 
when I come I may not find you what I wish you to be, and you may not 
find me what you wish me to be; I fear that there may be quarreling, 
jealousy, outbursts of anger, factions, slander, gossip, arrogance and 
disorder. 21 I am afraid that when I come again my God will humble me 
before you, and I will have to mourn over many of those who sinned 
before and have not repented of the impurity, immorality, and lewdness 
which they have practiced. 
13
	1 This is the third time I am coming to you. Every charge must be 
established by the evidence of two or three witnesses. 2 I warned those 
who sinned in the past and all the others, and I warn them now while 
absent, as I did when present the second time, that if I come again I will 
not spare them—3 since you desire proof that Christ is speaking in me. 
He is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful in you. 4 For he was 
crucified in weakness, yet he lives by the power of God. For we also are 
weak in him, but we shall live with him by the power of God for you. 
	5 Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith; test 
yourselves. Do you not realize that Christ Jesus is in you—unless, 
indeed, you fail the test? 6 I trust that you will realize that we have not 
failed the test. 7 Now we pray to God that you may not do wrong—not 
that we may appear to have met the test, but that you may do what is right, 
even though we may seem to have failed. 8 For we cannot do anything 
against the truth, but only for the truth. 9 For we are glad when we are 
weak and you are strong. What we pray for is your perfection. 10 I write 
these things while I am absent, in order that when I come I may not have 
to be severe in my use of the authority which the Lord gave me for 
building you up, and not for tearing you down. 
	11 Finally, brethren, farewell. Aim for perfection, listen to my 
appeal, be of one mind, live in peace. And the God of love and peace will 
be with you. 12 Greet one another with a holy kiss. 
	13 All the saints greet you. 14 The grace of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with 
you all. 




Second Corinthians, page 1
