Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The Letter of Paul 
to the Colossians

1
	1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and 
Timothy our brother, 2 to the saints and faithful brethren in Christ who 
are at Colossae: grace to you and peace from God our Father. 
	3 We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
when we pray for you, 4 because we have heard of your faith in Christ 
Jesus and of the love which you have for all the saints, 5 because of the 
hope laid up for you in heaven. Of this you have heard before in the word 
of the truth, the gospel 6 which has come to you, just as in all the world it 
is bearing fruit and growing, even as it has been doing among you since 
the day you heard it and understood the grace of God in truth; 7 as you 
learned it from Epaphras, our beloved fellow servant, who is a faithful 
minister of Christ on our behalf, 8 and who also told us of your love in 
the Spirit. 
	9 For this reason also, since the day we heard it, we have not 
ceased to pray for you, asking that you may be filled with the knowledge 
of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding, 10 so that you will 
live a life worthy of the Lord, to please him in all respects, bearing fruit in 
every good work and increasing in the knowledge of God. 11 May you be 
strengthened with all power, according to his glorious might, for all 
endurance and patience with joy, 12 giving thanks to the Father, who has 
qualified us to share in the inheritance of the saints in light. 13 For he has 
rescued us from the dominion of darkness and transferred us into the 
kingdom of his beloved Son, 14 in whom we have redemption, the 
forgiveness of sins. 15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn 
over all creation. 16 For by him all things were created, in heaven and on 
earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or 
authorities—all things were created through him and for him. 17 He is 
before all things, and in him all things hold together. 18 And he is the 
head of the body, the church; he is the beginning, the firstborn from the 
dead, so that he might have the first place in everything. 19 For all the 
fullness of God was pleased to dwell in him 20 and through him, to 
reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in 
heaven, by making peace through the blood of his cross. 
	21 And although you were once alienated and hostile in mind, 
doing evil deeds, 22 yet he has now reconciled you in his fleshly body 
through death, in order to present you before him holy and blameless and 
beyond reproach—23 if indeed you continue in the faith firmly 
established and steadfast, and are not moved away from the hope of the 
gospel that you have heard, which has been proclaimed to every creature 
under heaven, and of which I, Paul, have become a minister. 
	24 Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh 
I do my share for the sake of his body, which is the church, in filling up 
what is lacking in Christ's afflictions. 25 Of this church I became a 
minister according to the stewardship from God which was given to me 
for you, to make the word of God fully known, 26 the mystery that has 
been kept hidden for ages and generations, but is now disclosed to the 
saints. 27 To them God willed to make known what is the riches of the 
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope 
of glory. 28 We proclaim him, admonishing every man and teaching every 
man with all wisdom, so that we may present every man complete in 
Christ. 29 For this end I labor, striving with all his energy, which so 
mightily works within me. 
2
1 For I want you to know how greatly I strive for you, and for 
those at Laodicea, and for all who have not seen my face in the flesh, 2 
that their hearts may be encouraged as they are knit together in love, to 
have all the riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's 
mystery, that is, Christ himself, 3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of 
wisdom and knowledge. 4 I say this so that no one may delude you with 
fine-sounding arguments. 5 For even though I am absent in flesh, 
nevertheless I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your good order and 
the firmness of your faith in Christ. 
	6 Therefore as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so live in 
him, 7 rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you 
were taught, overflowing with thanksgiving. 8 See to it that no one takes 
you captive through philosophy and empty deception, according to human 
tradition, according to the elementary principles of the world, rather than 
according to Christ. 9 For in him all the fullness of Deity dwells in bodily 
form, 10 and you have been made complete in him, who is the head over 
all rule and authority. 11 In him you were also circumcised with a 
circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of the flesh by 
the circumcision of Christ; 12 having been buried with him in baptism, in 
which you were also raised up with him through faith in the working of 
God, who raised him from the dead. 13 When you were dead in your sins 
and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made you alive together with 
him, having forgiven us all our sins, 14 having canceled the certificate of 
debt, which stood against us with its decrees. He took what was hostile 
away from us, nailing it to the cross. 15 And having disarmed the powers 
and authorities, he made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them 
through him. 
	16 Therefore let no one judge you in questions of food or drink 
or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath day. 17 These 
things are only a shadow of what is to come; but the substance belongs to 
Christ. 18 Let no one disqualify you for the prize by delighting in self-
abasement and the worship of the angels, taking his stand on visions he 
has seen, puffed up without cause by his fleshly mind, 19 and not holding 
fast to the head, from whom the whole body, nourished and held together 
by its joints and ligaments, grows with a growth that is from God. 
	20 If with Christ you died to the elementary principles of the 
world, why, as if you still belonged to it, do you submit to regulations 
such as, 21 "Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch!" 22 (referring to 
things which are all destined perish with use), according to human 
commandments and teachings? 23 These indeed have an appearance of 
wisdom in promoting self-made religion and self-abasement and severe 
treatment of the body, but they are of no value against fleshly indulgence. 
3
	1 If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things that 
are above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. 2 Set your 
minds on the things above, not on things that are on earth. 3 For you have 
died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. 4 When Christ, who is 
our life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory. 
	5 Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly 
nature: sexual immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire and greed, which 
is idolatry. 6 Because of these, the wrath of God is coming. 7 In these you 
once walked, when you lived in them. 8 But now you must put them all 
away: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and filthy language from your mouth. 
9 Do not lie to one another, since you have put off the old self with its 
practices 10 and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in 
knowledge in the image of its Creator. 11 Here there is no Greek and Jew, 
circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave and free, but 
Christ is all, and in all. 
	12 So, as God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, put on a heart of 
compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience; 13 bearing with 
one another and, if one has a complaint against another, forgiving each 
other; as the Lord forgave you, so you also must forgive. 14 And over all 
these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity. 
15 Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, to which indeed you were 
called in the one body. And be thankful. 16 Let the word of Christ dwell 
in you richly, teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and sing 
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs with thankfulness in your hearts to 
God. 17 And whatever you do, in word or deed, do all in the name of the 
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him. 
	18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. 
19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them. 
	20 Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the 
Lord. 21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, or they will become 
discouraged. 
	22 Slaves, in everything obey those who are your masters 
according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in 
sincerity of heart, fearing the Lord. 23 Whatever you do, do your work 
heartily, as for the Lord and not for men, 24 knowing that you will receive 
an inheritance from the Lord as a reward. It is the Lord Christ you are 
serving. 25 For he who does wrong will be paid back for the wrong he has 
done, and there is no partiality. 
4
1 Masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, knowing that 
you also have a Master in heaven. 
	2 Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful in it with 
thanksgiving. 3 And pray for us as well, that God may open a door to us 
for the word, so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ, for which I 
am in chains, 4 so that I may make it clear, as I ought to speak. 5 Conduct 
yourselves with wisdom toward outsiders, making the most of the 
opportunity. 6 Let your speech always be full of grace, seasoned with salt, 
so that you may know how you ought to answer everyone. 
	7 Tychicus will tell you all about my affairs. He is a beloved 
brother, a faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord. 8 I have sent 
him to you for this very purpose, that you may know about our 
circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts; 9 and with him 
Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of yourselves. 
They will tell you everything that has taken place here. 
	10 My fellow prisoner Aristarchus sends you his greetings, and 
also Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you have received 
instructions; if he comes to you, welcome him.) 11 and also Jesus who is 
called Justus. These are the only men of the circumcision among my 
fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have proved to be a 
comfort to me. 12 Epaphras, who is one of your number, a servant of 
Jesus Christ, sends you his greetings, always laboring earnestly for you in 
his prayers, that you may stand mature and fully assured in all the will of 
God. 13 I testify for him that he has worked hard for you and for those 
who are in Laodicea and Hierapolis. 14 Luke, the beloved physician, and 
Demas send you greetings. 15 Give my greetings to the brethren at 
Laodicea, and to Nympha and the church in her house. 16 When this 
letter has been read among you, have it also read in the church of the 
Laodiceans; and see that you read the letter from Laodicea. 17 Say to 
Archippus, "See to the ministry which you have received in the Lord, that 
you may fulfill it."
	18 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. Remember my 
chains. Grace be with you. 



Colossians, page 3
