Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The Letter of Paul 
to the Ephesians

1
	1 Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the 
saints who are in Ephesus and faithful in Christ Jesus: 2 grace and peace 
to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
	3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who 
has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in 
Christ, 4 just as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, 
that we would be holy and blameless before him. In love 5 he predestined 
us to be adopted as his sons through Jesus Christ, according to the good 
pleasure of his will, 6 to the praise of his glorious grace, which he freely 
bestowed on us in the Beloved. 7 In him we have redemption through his 
blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his 
grace 8 which he lavished on us. In all wisdom and insight 9 he made 
known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which 
he purposed in Christ, 10 as a plan for the fullness of the times, to unite 
all things in Christ, things in heaven and things on earth. In him 11 also 
we have obtained an inheritance, having been predestined according to the 
purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his will, 12 in 
order that we, who were the first to hope in Christ, would be for the 
praise of his glory. 13 In him, you also have heard the word of truth, the 
gospel of your salvation. Having also believed, you were sealed in him 
with the promised Holy Spirit, 14 who is a deposit guaranteeing our 
inheritance, until the redemption of those who are God's possession—to 
the praise of his glory. 
	15 For this reason, ever since I heard of your faith in the Lord 
Jesus and your love for all the saints, 16 I do not cease giving thanks for 
you, remembering you in my prayers, 17 that the God of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and of 
revelation in the knowledge of him. 18 I pray also that the eyes of your 
heart may be enlightened, so that you may know what is the hope to 
which he has called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance in 
the saints, 19 and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power in us 
who believe. These are in accordance with the working of the strength of 
his might 20 which he worked in Christ when he raised him from the dead 
and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places, 21 far above all 
rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is 
named, not only in this age but also in the one to come. 22 And he put all 
things under his feet and gave him to be the head over all things for the 
church, 23 which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all. 
2
	1 And you were dead in your trespasses and sins, 2 in which you 
formerly walked according to the course of this world, according to the 
prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of 
disobedience. 3 Among them we all once lived in the lusts of our flesh, 
following the desires of flesh and mind, and so we were by nature 
children of wrath, like the rest of mankind. 4 But God, who is rich in 
mercy, because of his great love with which he loved us, 5 even when we 
were dead in our transgressions, made us alive together with Christ (by 
grace you have been saved), 6 and raised us up with him, and seated us 
with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, 7 so that in the coming 
ages he might show the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness toward 
us in Christ Jesus. 8 For by grace you have been saved through faith; and 
this is not of yourselves, it is the gift of God—9 not as a result of works, 
so that no one may boast. 10 For we are his workmanship, created in 
Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we 
would walk in them. 
	11 Therefore remember that formerly you, the Gentiles in the 
flesh, who are called "Uncircumcision" by the so-called "Circumcision," 
which is performed in the flesh by human hands—12 remember that you 
were at that time separate from Christ, excluded from the commonwealth 
of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and 
without God in the world. 13 But now in Christ Jesus you who once were 
far off have been brought near in the blood of Christ. 
	14 For he himself is our peace, who has made us both one and 
has broken down the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility, 15 by 
abolishing in his flesh the hostility, which is the Law of commandments 
and ordinances, so that he might create in himself one new man out of the 
two, thus making peace, 16 and might reconcile them both to God in one 
body through the cross, by which he put to death the hostility. 17 And he 
came and preached peace to you who were far away, and peace to those 
who were near; 18 for through him we both have our access in one Spirit 
to the Father. 19 So then you are no longer strangers and aliens, but you 
are fellow citizens with the saints, and are members of God's household, 
20 having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, 
Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone, 21 in whom the whole 
building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord; 
22 in whom you also are being built together into a dwelling of God in 
the Spirit. 
3
	1 For this reason I, Paul, am the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the 
sake of you Gentiles—2 assuming that you have heard of the stewardship 
of God's grace that was given to me for you, 3 that is, the mystery made 
known to me by revelation, as I have already written briefly. 4 When you 
read this, you can understand my insight into the mystery of Christ, 5 
which was not made known to the sons of men in other generations as it 
has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; 6 
that is, how the Gentiles are fellow heirs and members of the same body, 
and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel. 7 Of this 
gospel I was made a minister according to the gift of God's grace which 
was given me by the working of his power. 8 To me, though I am the very 
least of all the saints, this grace was given, to preach to the Gentiles the 
unsearchable riches of Christ, 9 and to make plain to everyone the 
administration of the mystery which for ages has been hidden in God who 
created all things; 10 so that the manifold wisdom of God might now be 
made known through the church to the rulers and authorities in the 
heavenly places. 11 This was according to the eternal purpose which he 
carried out in Christ Jesus our Lord, 12 in whom we have boldness and 
confidence of access through our faith in him. 13 Therefore I ask you not 
to lose heart at my tribulations for you, which are your glory. 
	14 For this reason I bow my knees before the Father, 15 from 
whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name, 16 that 
according to the riches of his glory he may grant you to be strengthened 
with power through his Spirit in the inner man, 17 so that Christ may 
dwell in your hearts through faith; and that you, being rooted and 
grounded in love, 18 may have power to comprehend with all the saints 
what is the breadth and length and height and depth, 19 and to know the 
love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all 
the fullness of God. 
	20 Now to him who is able to do far more abundantly than all 
that we ask or think, according to the power that works within us, 21 to 
him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations, for ever 
and ever. Amen. 
4
	1 I therefore, a prisoner for the Lord, beg you to lead a life 
worthy of the calling to which you have been called, 2 with all humility 
and gentleness, with patience, showing tolerance for one another in love, 
3 being diligent to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 4 
There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to the one hope 
that belongs to your call, 5 one Lord, one faith, one baptism, 6 one God 
and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all. 
	7 But to each one of us grace was given according to the measure 
of Christ's gift. 8 Therefore it says, 
	"When he ascended on high, he led a host of captives, 
		and he gave gifts to men."
	9 (In saying, "He ascended," what does it mean except that he 
had also descended into the lower parts of the earth? 10 He who 
descended is also he who ascended far above all the heavens, so that he 
might fill all things.) 11 And he gave some to be apostles, some prophets, 
some evangelists, some pastors and teachers, 12 to equip the saints for the 
work of service, for the building up of the body of Christ; 13 until we all 
attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to 
become mature, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. 14 
As a result, we are no longer to be children, tossed here and there by 
waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the cunning of 
men, by their craftiness in deceitful scheming. 15 But speaking the truth 
in love, we are to grow up in all aspects into him, who is the head, into 
Christ, 16 from whom the whole body, being joined and held together by 
what every joint supplies, according to the proper working of each part, 
causes the growth of the body and builds itself up in love. 
	17 Now this I affirm and testify in the Lord, that you must no 
longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds, 18 they are 
darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of 
the ignorance that is in them, due to the hardness of their heart; 19 and 
they, having become callous, have given themselves over to sensuality, 
greedy for the practice of every kind of impurity. 20 But you did not learn 
Christ in this way, 21 assuming that you have heard about him and were 
taught in him, as the truth is in Jesus. 22 You were taught, with regard to 
your former manner of life, to put off your old self, which is being 
corrupted by its deceitful lusts; 23 and be renewed in the spirit of your 
minds, 24 and put on the new nature, created after the likeness of God in 
true righteousness and holiness. 
	25 Therefore, laying aside falsehood, each one of you must 
speak truth with his neighbor, for we are members of one another. 26 Be 
angry, and yet do not sin; do not let the sun go down on your anger, 27 
and do not give the devil an opportunity. 28 He who has been stealing 
must steal no longer, but rather must labor, doing useful work with his 
own hands, so that he may have something to share with those in need. 29 
Let no unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is 
good for building others up according to the need of the moment, that it 
may impart grace to those who hear. 30 And do not grieve the Holy Spirit 
of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. 31 Let all 
bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away from 
you, along with all malice. 32 Be kind and tenderhearted to one another, 
forgiving each other, just as in Christ God forgave you. 
5
1 Therefore be imitators of God, as beloved children; 2 and walk in love, 
just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering 
and sacrifice to God. 3 But immorality or any impurity or greed must not 
even be named among you, as is proper among saints. 4 And there must be 
no filthiness and silly talk, or coarse jesting, which are not fitting, but 
rather let there be thanksgiving. 5 For of this you can be sure, that no 
immoral, impure, or covetous person—such a man is an idolater—has any 
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 
	6 Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of these 
things the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience. 7 
Therefore do not be partners with them; 8 for once you were darkness, but 
now you are light in the Lord; walk as children of light 9 (for the fruit of 
the light consists in all goodness and righteousness and truth), 10 and try 
to learn what is pleasing to the Lord. 11 Do not participate in the 
unfruitful deeds of darkness, but instead expose them. 12 For it is a 
shame even to speak of the things that they do in secret. 13 But all things 
become visible when they are exposed by the light, for everything that 
becomes visible is light. 14 For this reason it is said, 
	"Awake, O sleeper, 
		and arise from the dead, 
	and Christ will shine on you."
	15 Be careful, then, how you walk, not as unwise men, but as 
wise, 16 making the most of your time, because the days are evil. 17 
Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is. 
18 And do not get drunk with wine, for that is debauchery; but be filled 
with the Spirit, 19 speaking to one another in psalms and hymns and 
spiritual songs, singing and making melody with your heart to the Lord, 
20 always giving thanks to God the Father for everything, in the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 
	21 Be subject to one another out of reverence for Christ. 22 
Wives, be subject to your husbands, as to the Lord. 23 For the husband is 
the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of 
which he is himself the Savior. 24 As the church is subject to Christ, so 
let wives also be subject to their husbands in everything. 25 Husbands, 
love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for 
her, 26 that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of 
water with the word, 27 that he might present the church to himself in all 
her glory, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be 
holy and blameless. 28 So husbands ought also to love their wives as their 
own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. 29 For no one ever 
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, just as Christ also 
does the church, 30 because we are members of his body. 31 "For this 
reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, 
and the two shall become one flesh." 32 This is a profound mystery; but I 
am saying that it refers to Christ and the church. 33 However, each one of 
you must also love his wife as himself, and the wife must see that she 
respects her husband. 
6
	1 Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. 2 
"Honor your father and mother" (which is the first commandment with a 
promise), 3 "that it may be well with you and that you may live long on 
the earth." 4 Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger, but bring 
them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. 
	5 Slaves, be obedient to those who are your masters according to 
the flesh, with fear and trembling, in sincerity of heart, as to Christ; 6 not 
in the way of eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as slaves of Christ, doing 
the will of God from the heart. 7 Render service with good will, as to the 
Lord, and not to men, 8 knowing that whatever good thing each one does, 
this he will receive back from the Lord, whether he is a slave or free. 9 
Masters, do the same to them, and give up threatening, knowing that he 
who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and that there is no 
partiality with him. 
	10 Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. 
11 Put on the full armor of God, so that you may be able to stand against 
the schemes of the devil. 12 For our struggle is not against flesh and 
blood, but against the rulers, against the powers, against the world forces 
of this darkness, against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly 
places. 13 Therefore, take up the full armor of God, so that you may be 
able to resist in the evil day, and having done everything, to stand firm. 14 
Stand firm therefore, having girded your loins with truth, and having put 
on the breastplate of righteousness, 15 and having shod your feet with the 
preparation of the gospel of peace; 16 in addition to all this, taking up the 
shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of 
the evil one. 17 And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the 
spirit, which is the word of God. 18 Pray at all times in the Spirit, with all 
prayer and petition. And with this in view, keep alert with all 
perseverance and petition for all the saints, 19 and also pray for me, that 
in the opening of my mouth, utterance may be given me so that I will 
fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel, 20 for which I am an 
ambassador in chains; that I may declare it boldly, as I ought to speak. 
	21 Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful minister in the 
Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how I am and 
what I am doing. 22 I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you 
may know how we are, and that he may encourage your hearts. 
	23 Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the 
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 24 Grace be with all who love our Lord 
Jesus Christ with an undying love. 



Ephesians, page 1
