Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The Letter to the 
Hebrews
1
	1 In the past God spoke to our fathers by the prophets at many 
times and in various ways, 2 but in these last days he has spoken to us by 
his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he 
made the world. 3 He is the radiance of his glory and the exact 
representation of his being, and upholds all things by the word of his 
power. When he had made purification for sins, he sat down at the right 
hand of the Majesty on high, 4 having become as much superior to angels 
as the name he has inherited is more excellent than theirs. 
	5 For to which of the angels did God ever say, 
	"You are my son, 
		today I have begotten you"? 
And again, 
	"I will be a father to him 
		and he shall be a son to me"? 
6 And again, when God brings the first-born into the world, he says, 
	"Let all God's angels worship him." 
7 Of the angels he says, 
	"Who makes his angels winds, 
		and his servants flames of fire." 
8 But of the Son he says, 
	"Your throne, O God, is for ever and ever, 
		and the righteous scepter 
			is the scepter of your kingdom. 
9	You have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness; 
	therefore God, your God, 
		has anointed you with the oil of gladness 
			above your companions." 
10 And, 
	"You, Lord, in the beginning laid the foundation of the earth, 
		and the heavens are the work of your hands; 
11	they will perish, but you remain; 
		they will all grow old like a garment, 
12	you will roll them up like a mantle; 
		and like a garment they will be changed. 
	But you remain the same, 
		and your years will never end." 
13 But to which of the angels has he ever said, 
	"Sit at my right hand, 
		until I make your enemies a stool for your feet"? 
14 Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to serve for the sake of 
those who will inherit salvation? 
2
	1 Therefore we must pay more careful attention to what we have 
heard, lest we drift away from it. 2 For if the message spoken by angels 
was valid, and every transgression and disobedience received a just 
punishment, 3 how shall we escape if we neglect such a great salvation? It 
was declared at first by the Lord, and it was confirmed to us by those who 
heard him, 4 while God also bore witness, by signs and wonders and 
various miracles, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to 
his own will. 
	5 For it is not to angels that he subjected the world to come, 
about which we are speaking. 6 But there is a place where someone has 
testified, 
	"What is man that you are mindful of him, 
		or the son of man that you care for him? 
7	You made him for a little while lower than the angels; 
		you crowned him with glory and honor, 
8	and put everything in subjection under his feet." 
Now in putting everything in subjection to him, he left nothing that is not 
subject to him. As it is, we do not yet see everything subject to him. 9 But 
we see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the angels, 
crowned with glory and honor because of the suffering of death, so that 
by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone. 
	10 For it was fitting that he, for whom and through whom all 
things exist, in bringing many sons to glory, should make the author of 
their salvation perfect through suffering. 11 For both he who sanctifies 
and those who are being sanctified are all of one. That is why he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren, 12 saying, 
	"I will declare your name to my brethren, 
		in the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise."
13 And again, 
	"I will put my trust in him." 
And again, 
	"Here am I, and the children God has given me." 
14 Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself 
likewise partook of the same nature, that through death he might destroy 
him who has the power of death, that is, the devil, 15 and might free those 
who through fear of death were subject to slavery all their lives. 16 For 
surely it is not with angels that he is concerned, but with the descendants 
of Abraham. 17 Therefore he had to be made like his brethren in every 
respect, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the 
service of God, to make atonement for the sins of the people. 18 For 
because he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to help those 
who are tempted. 
3
	1 Therefore, holy brethren, who share in a heavenly calling, 
consider Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession. 2 He was 
faithful to him who appointed him, just as Moses also was faithful in all 
God's house. 3 Yet Jesus has been counted worthy of as much more glory 
than Moses as the builder of a house has more honor than the house. 4 
For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God. 
5 Now Moses was faithful in all God's house as a servant, to testify to the 
things that were to be spoken later, 6 but Christ is faithful as a son over 
God's house. And we are his house, if we hold fast to our confidence and 
the hope of which we boast. 
	7 Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says: 
	"Today, if you will hear his voice, 
8	do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, 
		on the day of testing in the wilderness, 
9	where your fathers put me to the test 
		and saw my works for forty years. 
10	Therefore I was angry with that generation, 
	and said, 'They always go astray in their hearts; 
		and they have not known my ways.' 
11	As I swore in my wrath, 
		'They shall never enter my rest.'" 
	12 Take care, brethren, lest there be in any one of you an evil, 
unbelieving heart, leading you to fall away from the living God. 13 But 
exhort one another every day, as long as it is called "Today," so that none 
of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. 14 For we have come 
to share in Christ if we hold our first confidence firm to the end, 15 while 
it is said, 
	"Today, if you will hear his voice, 
		do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion." 
16 Who were they who heard and rebelled? Were they not all those 
Moses led out of Egypt? 17 And with whom was he angry for forty years? 
Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness? 
18 And to whom did he swear that they would never enter his rest, but to 
those who were disobedient? 19 So we see that they were not able to 
enter because of unbelief. 
4
	1 Therefore, while the promise of entering his rest remains, let us 
fear lest any one of you be judged to have come short of it. 2 For we also 
have had the good news preached to us, just as they did; but the message 
they heard was of no value to them, because those who heard did not 
combine it with faith. 3 For we who have believed enter that rest, as he 
has said, 
	"As I swore in my wrath, 
	'They shall never enter my rest,'" 
although his works were finished from the foundation of the world. 4 For 
he has somewhere spoken of the seventh day in this way: "And God 
rested on the seventh day from all his works." 5 And again in this place 
he said, "They shall never enter my rest." 6 Since therefore it remains for 
some to enter it, and those who formerly had the good news preached to 
them failed to enter because of disobedience, 7 God again set a certain 
day, "Today," saying through David after so long a time just as has been 
said before, 
	"Today, if you hear his voice, 
	do not harden your hearts." 
8 For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken later of 
another day. 9 So then, there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of 
God; 10 for anyone who enters God's rest also rests from his own work, 
just as God did from his. 11 Therefore let us be diligent to enter that rest, 
so that no one will fall by following the same example of disobedience. 
	12 For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any 
two-edged sword, piercing even to the division of soul and spirit, of joints 
and marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart. 13 
And there is no creature hidden from his sight, but all things are open and 
laid bare to the eyes of him with whom we have to do. 
	14 Since then we have a great high priest who has passed 
through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our 
confession. 15 For we do not have a high priest who is unable to 
sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been 
tempted as we are, yet without sin. 16 Let us then with confidence draw 
near to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to 
help in time of need. 
5
	1 For every high priest chosen from among men is appointed to 
act on behalf of men in relation to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for 
sins. 2 He can deal gently with those who are ignorant and going astray, 
since he himself is beset with weakness. 3 Because of this he has to offer 
sacrifices for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people. 4 And no 
one takes the honor upon himself, but he is called by God, just as Aaron 
was. 
	5 So also Christ did not exalt himself to become a high priest, 
but it was he who said to him, 
	"You are my son, 
		today I have begotten you"; 
6 as he says also in another place, 
	"You are a priest forever, 
		after the order of Melchizedek." 
7 In the days of his flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and supplications, with 
loud cries and tears, to the one who was able to save him from death, and 
he was heard because of his godly fear. 8 Although he was a Son, he 
learned obedience from what he suffered; 9 and, once made perfect, he 
became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him, 10 being 
designated by God as a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek. 
	11 About this we have much to say which is hard to explain, 
since you have become dull of hearing. 12 For though by this time you 
ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you again the first 
principles of God's word. You need milk, not solid food; 13 for every one 
who lives on milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, for he is a 
babe. 14 But solid food is for the mature, for those who have their sense 
trained by practice to distinguish good from evil. 
6
	1 Therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about Christ 
and go on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentance from 
dead works, and of faith toward God, 2 with instruction about baptisms, 
the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment. 
3 And this we will do, if God permits. 4 For it is impossible for those 
who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, and 
have become partakers of the Holy Spirit, 5 and have tasted the goodness 
of the word of God and the powers of the age to come, 6 and then have 
fallen away, to renew them again to repentance, since they crucify again 
for themselves the Son of God, and put him to an open shame. 7 For land 
which drinks the rain that often falls upon it, and brings forth vegetation 
useful to those for whose sake it is cultivated, receives a blessing from 
God. 8 But if it bears thorns and thistles, it is worthless and near to being 
cursed; its end is to be burned. 
	9 Even though we speak like this, beloved, we are confident of 
better things in your case, things that accompany salvation. 10 For God is 
not so unjust as to forget your work and the love which you have shown 
for his sake in serving the saints, as you still do. 11 And we desire each 
one of you to show the same diligence in realizing the full assurance of 
hope until the end, 12 so that you may not be sluggish, but imitators of 
those who through faith and patience inherit the promises. 
	13 For when God made a promise to Abraham, since he had no 
one greater by whom to swear, he swore by himself, 14 saying, "I will 
surely bless you and multiply you." 15 And so Abraham, having patiently 
endured, obtained the promise. 16 Men swear by one greater than 
themselves, and in all their disputes the oath is final for confirmation. 17 
So when God desired to show more convincingly to the heirs of the 
promise the unchangeable character of his purpose, he interposed with an 
oath, 18 so that, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for 
God to lie, we who have taken refuge would have strong encouragement 
to take hold of the hope set before us. 19 We have this as a sure and 
steadfast anchor of the soul, a hope that enters into the inner sanctuary 
behind the curtain, 20 where Jesus has entered as a forerunner on our 
behalf, having become a high priest forever according to the order of 
Melchizedek. 
7
	1 For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High 
God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed 
him. 2 And to him Abraham gave a tenth part of everything. He is first, by 
translation of his name, king of righteousness, and then he is also king of 
Salem, that is, king of peace. 3 Without father, without mother, without 
genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like 
the Son of God, he remains a priest continually. 
	4 See how great he was! Even the patriarch Abraham gave him a 
tenth of the spoils. 5 And those descendants of Levi who receive the 
priestly office have a commandment in the law to take a tenth from the 
people, that is, from their brethren, though these also are descended from 
Abraham. 6 But this man whose genealogy is not derived from them 
received a tenth from Abraham and blessed him who had the promises. 7 
And without dispute the lesser person is blessed by the greater. 8 In this 
case tithes are received by mortal men, but in that case by one of whom it 
is witnessed that he lives on. 9 One might even say that Levi himself, who 
receives tithes, paid tithes through Abraham, 10 for he was still in the 
loins of his ancestor when Melchizedek met him. 
	11 Now if perfection could have been through the Levitical 
priesthood (for on the basis of it the people received the Law), what 
further need was there for another priest to arise according to the order of 
Melchizedek, and not one designated according to the order of Aaron? 12 
For when there is a change of the priesthood, there must also be a change 
of the law. 13 For the one of whom these things are spoken belonged to 
another tribe, from which no one has ever served at the altar. 14 For it is 
evident that our Lord was descended from Judah, and in regard to that 
tribe Moses said nothing about priests. 15 This becomes even more 
evident if another priest arises in the likeness of Melchizedek, 16 who has 
become a priest not on the basis of a law of carnal requirement, but 
according to the power of an indestructible life. 17 For it is declared of 
him, 
	"You are a priest forever, 
		after the order of Melchizedek." 
18 On the one hand, a former commandment is set aside because of its 
weakness and uselessness 19 (for the law made nothing perfect); and on 
the other hand, a better hope is introduced, through which we draw near 
to God. 20 And it was not without an oath. 21 Those who formerly 
became priests took their office without an oath, but he became a priest 
with an oath through the One who said to him, 
	"The Lord has sworn 
		and will not change his mind, 
	'You are a priest forever.'" 
22 Because of this oath, Jesus has become the guarantee of a better 
covenant. 23 The former priests were many in number, because they were 
prevented by death from continuing in office; 24 but he holds his 
priesthood forever, because he continues for ever. 25 Therefore he is able 
also to save forever those who draw near to God through him, since he 
always lives to make intercession for them. 
	26 For it was fitting that we should have such a high priest, holy, 
blameless, unstained, separated from sinners, exalted above the heavens. 
27 He does not need, like those high priests, to offer up daily sacrifices, 
first for his own sins and then for the sins of the people, because he did 
this once for all when he offered up himself. 28 For the Law appoints 
men as high priests who are weak, but the word of the oath, which came 
after the Law, appoints a Son who has been made perfect forever. 
8
	1 Now the point in what we are saying is this: we have such a 
high priest, one who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the 
Majesty in heaven, 2 a minister in the sanctuary, the true tabernacle which 
is set up by the Lord, not by man. 3 For every high priest is appointed to 
offer both gifts and sacrifices; and so it is necessary for this priest also to 
have something to offer. 4 Now if he were on earth, he would not be a 
priest at all, since there are priests who offer the gifts according to the 
law. 5 They serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly sanctuary; for when 
Moses was about to erect the tabernacle, he was instructed by God, 
saying, "See that you make everything according to the pattern which was 
shown you on the mountain." 6 But as it is, he has obtained a ministry 
which is as much more excellent than the old as the covenant he mediates 
is better, since it is enacted on better promises. 
	7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, there would have 
been no place sought for a second. 8 For he finds fault with them when he 
says: 
	"The days are coming, says the Lord, 
		when I will make a new covenant 
		with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah; 
9	not like the covenant that I made with their fathers 
		on the day when I took them by the hand 
			to lead them out of the land of Egypt; 
	for they did not continue in my covenant, 
		and so I paid no heed to them, says the Lord. 
10	This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel 
		after those days, says the Lord: 
	I will put my laws into their minds, 
		and I will write them on their hearts, 
	and I will be their God, 
		and they shall be my people. 
11	And they shall not teach every one his fellow 
		or every one his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' 
	for all shall know me, 
		from the least of them to the greatest. 
12	For I will be merciful to their iniquities, 
		and I will remember their sins no more." 
13 When he said, "A new covenant," he has made the first obsolete. And 
what is becoming obsolete and growing old is ready to vanish away. 
9
	1 Now even the first covenant had regulations for worship and 
an earthly sanctuary. 2 For there was a tabernacle prepared, the first one, 
in which were the lampstand and the table and the sacred bread; this is 
called the holy place. 3 Behind the second curtain was a tabernacle called 
the Holy of Holies, 4 having the golden altar of incense and the ark of the 
covenant covered on all sides with gold, which contained a golden jar 
holding the manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the 
covenant; 5 and above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the 
mercy seat. But of these things we cannot now speak in detail. 
	6 These preparations having thus been made, the priests go 
continually into the outer tabernacle, performing their ritual duties. 7 But 
into the second only the high priest goes, and he but once a year, and not 
without taking blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins of the 
people committed in ignorance. 8 The Holy Spirit was showing by this 
that the way into the holy place had not yet been disclosed as long as the 
outer tabernacle was still standing. 9 This is symbolic for the present 
time. According to this arrangement, gifts and sacrifices are offered which 
cannot perfect the conscience of the worshiper, 10 since they relate only 
to food and drink and various washings – regulations for the flesh 
imposed until the time of reformation. 
	11 But when Christ appeared as a high priest of the good things 
that have come, he entered through the greater and more perfect 
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation. 12 He 
did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves, but he entered 
the holy place once for all by his own blood, having obtained eternal 
redemption. 13 For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a 
heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled sanctify for the cleansing of 
the flesh, 14 how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the 
eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse your 
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? 
	15 For this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant, that 
those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, now 
that he has died as a ransom to set them free from the transgressions 
committed under the first covenant. 16 For where a will is, there must of 
necessity be the death of the one who made it. 17 For a will is in force 
only when somebody has died, since it never takes effect while the one 
who made it is living. 18 This is why even the first covenant was not 
ratified without blood. 19 For when every commandment of the law had 
been declared by Moses to all the people, he took the blood of calves and 
goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the 
book itself and all the people, 20 saying, "This is the blood of the 
covenant which God has commanded you." 21 And in the same way he 
sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and all the vessels used in 
worship. 22 Indeed, under the law almost everything is cleansed with 
blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness of sins. 
	23 It was necessary, then, for the copies of the heavenly things to 
be purified with these sacrifices, but the heavenly things themselves with 
better sacrifices than these. 24 For Christ did not enter a holy place made 
with hands, a copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear 
in the presence of God for us. 25 Nor was it that he should offer himself 
again and again, as the high priest enters the holy place year by year with 
blood not his own. 26 For then he would have had to suffer repeatedly 
since the foundation of the world. But now, he has appeared once for all 
at the end of the ages to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. 27 And 
just as it is appointed for men to die once, and after that comes judgment, 
28 so Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will 
appear a second time, not to bear sin but to bring salvation to those who 
are eagerly waiting for him. 
10
1 For since the law has only a shadow of the good things to come and not 
the true form of these realities, it can never, by the same sacrifices which 
are continually offered year after year, make perfect those who draw near. 
2 Otherwise, would they not have ceased to be offered? If the worshipers 
had once been cleansed, they would no longer have any consciousness of 
sins. 3 But in these sacrifices there is a reminder of sins year after year. 4 
For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. 
	5 Therefore, when Christ came into the world, he said: 
	"Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, 
		but a body you prepared for me; 
6	in burnt offerings and sin offerings 
		you have taken no pleasure. 
7	Then I said, 'Behold, 
		I have come to do your will, O God,' 
	as it is written of me in the roll of the book." 
8 When he said above, "You did not desire, nor did you take pleasure in 
sacrifices and offerings and burnt offerings and sin offerings" (these are 
offered according to the law), 9 then he said, "Behold, I have come to do 
your will." He takes away the first in order to establish the second. 10 
And by that will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body 
of Jesus Christ once for all. 
	11 And every priest stands daily at his service, offering time after 
time the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. 12 But when he 
had offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right 
hand of God, 13 waiting from that time until his enemies be made a stool 
for his feet. 14 For by one offering he has perfected for all time those who 
are sanctified. 
	15 And the Holy Spirit also bears witness to us; for after saying, 
16	"This is the covenant that I will make 
		with them after those days, says the Lord: 
	I will put my laws into their hearts, 
		and in their minds I will write them," 
17 then he adds, 
	"Their sins and their lawless deeds 
		I will remember no more." 
18 Where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer any offering for 
sin. 
	19 Therefore, brethren, since we have confidence to enter the 
holy place by the blood of Jesus, 20 by a new and living way which he 
opened for us through the curtain, that is, his flesh, 21 and since we have 
a great priest over the house of God, 22 let us draw near with a true heart 
in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil 
conscience and our bodies washed with pure water. 23 Let us hold fast 
the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is 
faithful; 24 and let us consider how to stir up one another to love and 
good works, 25 not forsaking our own assembling together, as is the habit 
of some, but encouraging one another; and all the more, as you see the 
Day drawing near. 
	26 For if we sin deliberately after we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, 27 but 
a fearful expectation of judgment, and a fury of fire which will consume 
the adversaries. 28 Anyone who has rejected the law of Moses dies 
without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses. 29 How much 
severer punishment do you think a man will deserve who has trampled 
under foot the Son of God, and has regarded as an unclean thing the 
blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and has insulted the 
Spirit of grace? 30 For we know him who said, 
	"Vengeance is mine, I will repay." 
And again, 
	"The Lord will judge his people." 
31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 
	32 But remember the former days when, after you were 
enlightened, you endured a great struggle with sufferings, 33 sometimes 
being publicly exposed to insult and persecution; and at other times 
standing side by side with those who were so treated. 34 For you had 
compassion on the prisoners, and you joyfully accepted the plundering of 
your property, since you knew that you yourselves had a better possession 
and an abiding one. 35 Therefore do not throw away your confidence, 
which has a great reward. 36 For you have need of endurance, so that 
when you have done the will of God, you may receive what was promised. 
37	"For yet in a very little while, 
		he who is coming will come and will not delay. 
38	But my righteous one shall live by faith, 
		and if he shrinks back, 
			my soul has no pleasure in him." 
39 But we are not of those who shrink back and are destroyed, but of 
those who have faith and keep their souls. 
11
	1 Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction 
of things not seen. 2 For by it the men of old received divine approval. 
	3 By faith we understand that the world was created by the word 
of God, so that what is seen was not made out of things which are visible. 
	4 By faith Abel offered God a more acceptable sacrifice than 
Cain, through which he was commended as a righteous man, when God 
spoke well of his gifts. And through faith he still speaks, even though he 
is dead. 5 By faith Enoch was taken up so that he should not see death; 
and he was not found, because God had taken him. For before he was 
taken he was attested as having pleased God. 6 And without faith it is 
impossible to please God, for anyone who comes to him must believe that 
he exists and that he rewards those who earnestly seek him. 7 By faith 
Noah, being warned by God about things not yet seen, in godly fear 
prepared an ark for the salvation of his household, by which he 
condemned the world, and became an heir of the righteousness which 
comes by faith. 
	8 By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a 
place which he was to receive as an inheritance; and he went out, not 
knowing where he was going. 9 By faith he lived in the land of promise, 
as in a foreign land, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him 
of the same promise; 10 for he was looking forward to the city which has 
foundations, whose architect and builder is God. 11 By faith Sarah 
herself received power to conceive, even when she was past the age, 
because she considered him faithful who had promised. 12 Therefore 
from one man, and him as good as dead, were born descendants as many 
as the stars of heaven and as the innumerable grains of sand by the 
seashore. 
	13 These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but 
having seen them and greeted them from a distance, and having 
acknowledged that they were strangers and exiles on the earth. 14 For 
people who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a country 
of their own. 15 And if they had been thinking of that country from which 
they had gone out, they would have had opportunity to return. 16 But as it 
is, they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is 
not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a city. 
	17 By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac, and 
he who had received the promises was ready to offer up his only son, 18 
of whom it was said, "Through Isaac shall your descendants be called." 
19 He considered that God was able to raise men even from the dead; 
from which, figuratively speaking, he did receive him back. 20 By faith 
Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau in regard to their future. 21 By faith Jacob, 
when he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshipped 
as he leaned on the top of his staff. 22 By faith Joseph, when he was at 
the end of his life, made mention of the exodus of the Israelites, and gave 
orders concerning his bones. 
	23 By faith Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three 
months by his parents, because they saw he was a beautiful child; and 
they were not afraid of the king's edict. 24 By faith Moses, when he was 
grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, 25 choosing 
rather to share ill-treatment with the people of God than to enjoy the 
fleeting pleasures of sin. 26 He considered abuse suffered for the Christ 
greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking ahead to his 
reward. 27 By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the anger of the king; for he 
endured as seeing him who is invisible. 28 By faith he kept the Passover 
and the sprinkling of the blood, so the destroyer of the firstborn would 
not touch them. 29 By faith the people passed through the Red Sea as on 
dry land; but when the Egyptians tried to do so, they were drowned. 30 
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they had been encircled for 
seven days. 31 By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with those who 
were disobedient, because she had welcomed the spies. 
	32 And what more shall I say? For time will fail me if I tell of 
Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets, 
33 who through faith conquered kingdoms, performed acts of justice, 
received promises, shut the mouths of lions, 34 quenched the power of 
fire, escaped the edge of the sword, whose weakness was turned to 
strength, who became mighty in war, and put foreign armies to flight. 35 
Women received back their dead, raised to life again. Others were 
tortured and refused to be released, so that they might gain a better 
resurrection. 36 And others experienced mockings and scourgings, yes, 
also chains and imprisonment. 37 They were stoned, they were sawn in 
two, they were killed with the sword; they went about in skins of sheep 
and goats, destitute, afflicted, ill-treated – 38 of whom the world was not 
worthy – wandering in deserts and mountains, and in caves and holes in 
the ground. 
	39 And all these, though well attested by their faith, did not 
receive what was promised, 40 because God had provided something 
better for us, that apart from us they should not be made perfect. 
12
	1 Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of 
witnesses, let us also lay aside every weight, and the sin which so easily 
entangles us, and let us run with perseverance the race that is set before 
us, 2 fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who 
for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the 
shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. 3 Consider 
him who endured from sinners such hostility against himself, so that you 
may not grow weary and lose heart. 
	4 In your struggle against sin, you have not yet resisted to the 
point of shedding your blood. 5 And have you forgotten the exhortation 
which addresses you as sons? – 
	"My son, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord, 
		nor lose courage when you are rebuked by him. 
6	For those whom the Lord loves he disciplines, 
		and he scourges every son whom he receives." 
7 It is for discipline that you endure. God is treating you as sons; for what 
son is there whom his father does not discipline? 8 If you are left without 
discipline, in which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate 
children and not sons. 9 Besides this, we have had fathers of our flesh to 
discipline us and we respected them. Shall we not much more be subject 
to the Father of spirits and live? 10 For they disciplined us for a short 
time as seemed best to them, but he disciplines us for our good, that we 
may share his holiness. 11 For the moment all discipline seems painful 
rather than pleasant; but later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness 
to those who have been trained by it. 
	12 Therefore lift your feeble hands and strengthen your weak 
knees, 13 and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may 
not be put out of joint, but rather be healed. 
	14 Strive for peace with all men, and for the holiness without 
which no one will see the Lord. 15 See to it that no one comes short of 
the grace of God; that no root of bitterness spring up and cause trouble, 
and by it many become defiled; 16 that no one be immoral or godless like 
Esau, who sold his own birthright for a single meal. 17 For you know that 
afterward, when he desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he 
found no place for repentance, though he sought it diligently with tears. 
	18 For you have not come to a mountain that can be touched and 
to a blazing fire, and to darkness and gloom and whirlwind, 19 and the 
blast of a trumpet, and the sound of a voice whose words made the hearers 
beg that no further word be spoken to them. 20 For they could not endure 
the order that was given, "If even a beast touches the mountain, it shall be 
stoned." 21 The sight was so terrifying that Moses said, "I am trembling 
with fear." 22 But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the 
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels, to the joyful 
assembly 23 and church of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and 
to God, the Judge of all, and to the spirits of righteous men made perfect, 
24 and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled 
blood that speaks better than the blood of Abel. 
	25 See to it that you do not refuse him who is speaking. For if 
they did not escape when they refused him who warned them on earth, 
how much less shall we escape, if we turn away from him who warns us 
from heaven? 26 Then his voice shook the earth, but now he has 
promised, "Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but also 
heaven." 27 This phrase, "Yet once more," indicates the removing of 
those things which can be shaken, as of created things, in order that what 
cannot be shaken may remain. 28 Therefore, since we are receiving a 
kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful, and offer to God 
acceptable worship with reverence and awe, 29 for our God is a 
consuming fire. 
13
	1 Let brotherly love continue. 2 Do not forget to show 
hospitality to strangers, for by so doing some people have entertained 
angels without knowing it. 3 Remember the prisoners, as though in prison 
with them, and those who are ill-treated, since you yourselves are also in 
the body. 4 Let marriage be held in honor among all, and let the marriage 
bed be undefiled; for God will judge the immoral and adulterous. 5 Keep 
your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, 
for God has said, "I will never leave you, nor will I forsake you." 6 So we 
say with confidence, 
	"The Lord is my helper; 
		I will not be afraid. 
	What can man do to me?" 
	7 Remember your leaders, those who spoke to you the word of 
God; consider the outcome of their life, and imitate their faith. 8 Jesus 
Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever. 9 Do not be carried 
away by varied and strange teachings; for it is good for the heart to be 
strengthened by grace, not by foods, through which those who were so 
occupied were not benefited. 10 We have an altar from which those who 
serve the tabernacle have no right to eat. 11 For the bodies of those 
animals whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priest as 
an offering for sin, are burned outside the camp. 12 And so Jesus also 
suffered outside the city gate to sanctify the people through his own 
blood. 13 Let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the disgrace 
he bore. 14 For here we do not have an enduring city, but we are looking 
for the city which is to come. 15 Through him then let us continually 
offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that 
acknowledge his name. 16 Do not forget to do good and to share with 
others, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. 
	17 Obey your leaders and submit to them; for they are keeping 
watch over your souls, as men who will have to give account. Let them do 
this with joy, and not with grief, for that would be of no advantage to you. 
	18 Pray for us, for we are sure that we have a clear conscience, 
desiring to live honorably in all things. 19 I urge you all the more to do 
this so that I may be restored to you the sooner. 
	20 Now may the God of peace who brought again from the dead 
our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the 
eternal covenant, 21 equip you with every good thing to do his will, 
working in us that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to 
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
	22 I urge you, brethren, bear with my word of exhortation, for I 
have written to you briefly. 23 You should know that our brother Timothy 
has been released, with whom I will see you if he comes soon. 
	24 Greet all your leaders and all the saints. Those who come 
from Italy send you greetings. 25 Grace be with you all.


Hebrews, page 2
