Copyright © Timothy E. Clontz 1999  All rights reserved.
The Gospel 
According to Mark


1
	1 The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

	2 As it is written in Isaiah the prophet: 
	"Behold, I send my messenger before your face, 
		who will prepare your way"; 
3	"The voice of one crying in the wilderness: 
		'Prepare the way of the Lord; 
		make his paths straight.'"
4 John came baptizing in the wilderness, and preaching a baptism of 
repentance for the forgiveness of sins. 5 And all the land of Judea, and the 
people from Jerusalem, went out to him and they were all baptized by him 
in the Jordan River, confessing their sins. 6 Now John was clothed with 
camel's hair, and with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts 
and wild honey. 7 And he preached, saying, "After me comes One who is 
mightier than I, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop 
down and untie. 8 I have baptized you with water, but he will baptize you 
with the Holy Spirit."
	9 In those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was 
baptized by John in the Jordan. 10 And immediately coming up out of the 
water, he saw the heavens opened and the Spirit descending upon him 
like a dove. 11 And a voice came from heaven, "You are my beloved Son, 
with whom I am well pleased."
	12 The Spirit immediately drove him out into the wilderness. 13 
And he was in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan; and he was 
with the wild beasts, and the angels ministered to him. 
	14 Now after John was put in prison, Jesus came to Galilee, 
preaching the gospel of God, 15 and saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the 
kingdom of God is at hand; repent, and believe in the gospel."
	16 And as he walked by the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and 
Andrew his brother casting a net into the Sea; for they were fishermen. 17 
And Jesus said to them, "Come follow me, and I will make you become 
fishers of men." 18 And immediately they left their nets and followed 
him. 19 When he had gone a little farther from there, he saw James the 
son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the boat mending 
their nets. 20 And immediately he called them; and they left their father 
Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, and followed him. 
	21 And they went into Capernaum, and immediately on the 
Sabbath he entered the synagogue and taught. 22 And they were 
astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as one who had authority, 
and not as the scribes. 23 Now there was a man in their synagogue with 
an unclean spirit. And he cried out, 24 saying, "Let us alone! What have 
we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Did you come to destroy us? I 
know who you are—the Holy One of God!" 25 But Jesus rebuked him, 
saying, "Be quiet, and come out of him!" 26 And the unclean spirit, 
convulsing him and crying with a loud voice, came out of him. 27 And 
they were all amazed, so that they questioned among themselves, saying, 
"What is this? A new teaching! With authority he commands even the 
unclean spirits, and they obey him." 28 And at once his fame spread 
everywhere throughout all the surrounding region of Galilee. 
	29 As soon as they left the synagogue, they went with James and 
John, and entered the house of Simon and Andrew. 30 Now Simon's 
mother-in-law lay sick with a fever, and immediately they told him about 
her. 31 So he came and took her by the hand and lifted her up, and 
immediately the fever left her. And she served them. 32 Now at evening, 
when the sun had set, they brought to him all who were sick and those 
who were demon-possessed. 33 And the whole city was gathered together 
at the door. 34 And he healed many who were sick with various diseases, 
and cast out many demons; and he would not permit the demons to speak, 
because they knew him. 
	35 Now in the morning, a long while before daylight, he rose 
and went out to a solitary place, and there he prayed. 36 And Simon and 
those who were with him searched for him, 37 and when they found him, 
they said to him, "Everyone is looking for you." 38 And he said to them, 
"Let us go on to the next towns, so I may preach there also; for that is 
why I have come." 39 And he went throughout all Galilee, preaching in 
their synagogues and casting out demons. 
	40 Then a leper came to him, imploring him, kneeling down to 
him and saying to him, "If you are willing, you can make me clean." 41 
And Jesus, moved with compassion, put out his hand and touched him, 
and said to him, "I am willing; be clean." 42 And immediately the leprosy 
left him, and he was made clean. 43 And he strictly warned him and sent 
him away at once, 44 and he said to him, "See that you say nothing to 
anyone; but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing 
what Moses commanded, as a testimony to them." 45 But he went out and 
began to talk freely about it, and to spread the news, so that Jesus could 
no longer openly enter a town, but was outside in the deserted places; and 
people came to him from every quarter. 
2
	1 And when he entered Capernaum after some days, it was heard 
that he was home. 2 And many gathered together, so that there was no 
longer room to receive them, not even near the door. And he preached the 
word to them. 3 Then they came to him, bringing a paralytic carried by 
four men. 4 And when they could not get near him because of the crowd, 
they made an opening in the roof above him; and when they had broken 
through, they let down the pallet on which the paralytic was lying. 5 
When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, "Son, your sins are 
forgiven." 6 Now some of the scribes were sitting there, reasoning in their 
hearts, 7 "Why does this man speak like this? He is blaspheming! Who 
can forgive sins but God alone?" 8 And immediately, when Jesus 
perceived in his spirit that they reasoned thus within themselves, he said 
to them, "Why do you reason about these things in your hearts? 9 Which 
is easier, to say to the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Rise, 
take up your pallet and walk'? 10 But that you may know that the Son of 
Man has authority on earth to forgive sins"—he said to the paralytic, 11 
"I say to you, rise, take up your pallet and go home." 12 And he rose, and 
immediately took up the pallet and went out in the sight of them all; so 
that they were all amazed and glorified God, saying, "We never saw 
anything like this!"
	13 Then he went out again beside the sea; and all the crowd 
came to him, and he taught them. 14 As he passed by, he saw Levi the son 
of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office, and he said to him, "Follow me." So 
he rose and followed him. 15 And as he sat at table in Levi's house, many 
tax collectors and sinners were sitting with Jesus and his disciples; for 
there were many who followed him. 16 And the scribes of the Pharisees, 
when they saw him eating with sinners and tax collectors, said to his 
disciples, "Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?" 17 And 
when Jesus heard it, he said to them, "Those who are well have no need of 
a physician, but those who are sick. I did not come to call the righteous, 
but sinners."
	18 Now John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting. And 
people came and said to him, "Why do John's disciples and the disciples 
of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples do not fast?" 19 And Jesus said to 
them, "Can the guests of the bridegroom fast while he is with them? As 
long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. 20 But the 
days will come, when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and 
then they will fast in that day. 
	21 "No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; if 
he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, and the tear is made 
worse. 22 And no one puts new wine into old wineskins; if he does, the 
wine will burst the skins, and the wine is lost and the wineskins are 
ruined. But new wine must be put into new wineskins." 
	23 One Sabbath he was going through the grainfields; and as 
they made their way his disciples began to pluck heads of grain. 24 And 
the Pharisees said to him, "Look, why are they doing what is not lawful 
on the Sabbath?" 25 But he said to them, "Have you never read what 
David did when he was in need and hungry, he and those who were with 
him: 26 how he entered the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high 
priest, and ate the consecrated bread, which is not lawful to eat, except 
for the priests, and also gave some to those who were with him?" 27 And 
he said to them, "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the 
Sabbath. 28 So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath."
3
	1 He entered the synagogue again, and a man was there who had 
a withered hand. 2 And they watched him closely, to see whether he 
would heal him on the Sabbath, so that they might accuse him. 3 And he 
said to the man who had the withered hand, "Come here." 4 Then he said 
to them, "Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life 
or to kill?" But they kept silent. 5 And he looked around at them with 
anger, grieved at the hardness of their hearts, and said to the man, 
"Stretch out your hand." He stretched it out, and his hand was restored. 6 
Then the Pharisees went out and immediately plotted with the Herodians 
against him, how they might destroy him. 
	7 Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea, and a great 
multitude from Galilee followed; also from Judea 8 and Jerusalem and 
Idumea and beyond the Jordan and from around Tyre and Sidon, a great 
multitude, when they heard how many things he was doing, came to him. 
9 And he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him because of 
the crowd, lest they should crush him. 10 For he had healed many, so that 
all who had diseases pressed upon him to touch him. 11 And whenever 
the unclean spirits saw him, they fell down before him and cried out, 
"You are the Son of God." 12 But he strictly ordered them not to make 
him known. 
	13 And he went up on the mountain, and called to him those he 
himself wanted. And they came to him. 14 Then he appointed twelve, that 
they might be with him and that he might send them out to preach, 15 and 
to have authority to cast out the demons: 16 Simon, to whom he gave the 
name Peter; 17 James the son of Zebedee and John the brother of James, 
to whom he gave the name Boanerges, that is, "Sons of Thunder"; 18 
Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James the son of 
Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot; 19 and Judas Iscariot, who 
betrayed him. 
	20 Then he went home; and the crowd came together again, so 
that they could not even eat. 21 When his family heard about this, they 
went to take charge of him, for they said, "He is out of his mind."  22 And 
the scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, "He is possessed by 
Beelzebub, and by the prince of demons he casts out the demons." 23 So 
he called them to himself and said to them in parables: "How can Satan 
cast out Satan? 24 If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom 
cannot stand. 25 And if a house is divided against itself, that house 
cannot stand. 26 And if Satan has risen up against himself, and is divided, 
he cannot stand, but is coming to an end. 27 No one can enter a strong 
man's house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man. 
And then he will plunder his house. 28 Truly, I say to you, all sins will be 
forgiven the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies they utter; 29 but 
whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is 
guilty of an eternal sin"—30 because they said, "He has an unclean 
spirit."
	31 Then his brothers and his mother came. And standing outside 
they sent to him, and called him. 32 And a crowd was sitting around him; 
and they said to him, "Your mother and your brothers are outside, asking 
for you." 33 And he replied, "Who are my mother and my brothers?" 34 
And he looked at those who sat in a circle around him, and said, "Here 
are my mother and my brothers! 35 Whoever does the will of God is my 
brother, and sister, and mother."
4
	1 Again he began to teach by the sea. and a very large crowd 
gathered around him, so that he got into a boat and sat in it on the sea; 
and the whole crowd was beside the sea on the land. 2 Then he taught 
them many things by parables, and said to them in his teaching: 3 "Listen! 
A sower went out to sow. 4 And as he sowed the seed, some fell along the 
path, and the birds came and devoured it. 5 Some fell on rocky ground, 
where it did not have much soil, and immediately it sprang up, because it 
had no depth of soil. 6 But when the sun came up it was scorched, and 
because it had no root it withered away. 7 Other seed fell among thorns 
and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no grain. 8 But other 
seed fell on good soil and yielded a crop that sprang up, increased and 
produced thirtyfold, sixty, and a hundred." 9 And he said, "He who has 
ears to hear, let him hear."
	10 And when he was alone, those around him with the twelve 
asked him about the parables. 11 And he said to them, "To you has been 
given the secret of the kingdom of God, but to those outside everything is 
in parables; 12 so that 
	'seeing they may see but not perceive, 
		and hearing may hear but not understand; 
	lest they should turn again, and be forgiven.'" 
	13 And he said to them, "Do you not understand this parable? 
How then will you understand all the parables? 14 The sower sows the 
word. 15 And these are the ones along the path where the word is sown. 
When they hear, Satan comes immediately and takes away the word that 
was sown in them. 16 And these likewise are the ones sown on rocky 
ground who, when they hear the word, immediately receive it with joy; 17 
and they have no root in themselves, but endure for only a time. Then, 
when tribulation or persecution arises on account of the word, 
immediately they fall away. 18 And others are the ones sown among 
thorns; they are those who hear the word, 19 but the cares of this world, 
the deceitfulness of riches, and the desires for other things enter in and 
choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. 20 But these are the ones 
sown on good soil, those who hear the word, accept it, and bear fruit 
thirtyfold, sixty, and a hundred."
	21 And he said to them, "Is a lamp brought to be put under a 
basket or under a bed? Is it not to be set on a lampstand? 22 For there is 
nothing hidden, except to be revealed; nor is anything secret, but that it 
should come to light. 23 If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear."
	24 Then he said to them, "Take heed what you hear. With the 
measure you use, it will be measured to you; and more will be given you. 
25 For whoever has, to him will more be given; and whoever does not 
have, from him even what he has will be taken away."
	26 And he said, "The kingdom of God is as if a man should 
scatter seed on the ground, 27 and should sleep by night and rise by day, 
and the seed should sprout and grow, he himself does not know how. 28 
All by itself the earth produces grain—first the blade, then the head, then 
the full kernel in the head. 29 But when the grain is ripe, at once he puts 
in the sickle, because the harvest has come."
	30 And he said, "With what shall we compare the kingdom of 
God, or what parable shall we use for it? 31 It is like a mustard seed 
which, when it is sown on the ground, is the smallest of all seeds in the 
earth; 32 yet when it is sown it grows up and becomes the greatest of all 
shrubs, and puts forth large branches, so that the birds of the air can make 
nests in its shade."
	33 With many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they 
were able to hear it. 34 But without a parable he did not speak to them. 
And when they were alone, he explained everything to his own disciples. 
	35 On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, "Let us 
go over to the other side." 36 And leaving the crowd, they took him along, 
just as he was, in the boat. There were also other boats with him. 37 And 
a great storm arose, and the waves beat into the boat, so that it was 
already filling. 38 But he was in the stern, asleep on a cushion. And they 
woke him and said to him, "Teacher, do you not care if we perish?" 39 
Then he rose and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, "Peace! Be still!" 
And the wind ceased and there was a great calm. 40 He said to them, 
"Why are you so afraid? Have you no faith?" 41 And they were filled with 
awe, and said to one another, "Who is this? Even the wind and the sea 
obey him!" 
5
	1 They came to the other side of the sea, to the country of the 
Gerasenes. 2 And when he had come out of the boat, there met him out of 
the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 3 who lived among the tombs; and 
no one could bind him any more, not even with a chain, 4 for he had often 
been bound with shackles and chains. But the chains he wrenched apart, 
and the shackles he broke in pieces; and no one had the strength to 
subdue him. 5 Night and day among the tombs and on the mountains he 
was always crying out, and cutting himself with stones. 6 And when he 
saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and worshipped him. 7 And crying out 
with a loud voice, he said, "What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of 
the Most High God? I implore you by God, do not torment me." 8 For he 
had said to him, "Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!" 9 Then Jesus 
asked him, "What is your name?" And he replied, "My name is Legion, 
for we are many." 10 And he begged him eagerly not to send them out of 
the country. 
	11 Now a large herd of swine was feeding there on the hillside. 
12 So all the demons begged him, "Send us to the swine, that we may 
enter them." 13 So he gave them permission. And the unclean spirits came 
out, and entered the swine; and the herd, numbering about two thousand, 
rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and were drowned in the sea. 14 
So those who fed the swine fled, and told it in the city and in the country. 
And people went out to see what it was that had happened. 15 And they 
came to Jesus, and saw the man who had been possessed sitting there, 
clothed and in his right mind, the man who had had the legion; and they 
were afraid. 16 And those who had seen it told the people what had 
happened to the demon-possessed man, and about the swine. 17 Then 
they began to plead with Jesus to depart from their region. 18 And as he 
was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged 
him that he might be with him. 19 Jesus did not let him, but said, "Go 
home to your friends and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, 
and how he has had mercy on you." 20 And he went away and began to 
proclaim in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him; and all men 
marveled. 
	21 And when Jesus had crossed over again by the boat to the 
other side, a great crowd gathered around him; and he was by the sea. 22 
Then came one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name. And seeing 
him, he fell at his feet, 23 and pleaded earnestly with him, saying, "My 
little daughter is at the point of death. Come and lay your hands on her, 
so that she may be healed, and live." 24 So Jesus went with him. 
	And a great crowd followed him and thronged around him. 25 
And there was a woman who had endured a flow of blood for twelve 
years, 26 and she had suffered much under many physicians, and had 
spent all that she owned, and was no better but rather grew worse. 27 
When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and 
touched his garment. 28 For she said, "If I touch even his clothes, I shall 
be made well." 29 And immediately the bleeding stopped; and she felt in 
her body that she was healed of her disease. 30 And Jesus, immediately 
knowing in himself that power had gone out from him, turned around in 
the crowd and said, "Who touched my clothes?" 31 And his disciples said 
to him, "You see the crowd pressing around you, and yet you say, 'Who 
touched me?'" 32 And he looked around to see who had done it. 33 But 
the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down 
before him in fear and trembling and told him the whole truth. 34 And he 
said to her, "Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be 
healed of your disease." 
	35 While he was still speaking, some came from the ruler of the 
synagogue's house who said, "Your daughter is dead. Why trouble the 
Teacher any further?" 36 But ignoring what they said, Jesus said to the 
ruler of the synagogue, "Do not be afraid; only believe." 37 And he 
allowed no one to follow him except Peter, James, and John the brother 
of James. 38 When they came to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, 
he saw a tumult, and people weeping and wailing loudly. 39 And when he 
came in, he said to them, "Why make this commotion and weep? The 
child is not dead, but sleeping." 40 And they laughed at him. But after he 
put them all outside, he took the child's father and mother and those who 
were with him, and went in where the child was. 41 He took her by the 
hand and said to her, "Talitha cumi!" which means, "Little girl, I say to 
you, arise." 42 Immediately the girl stood up and walked (she was twelve 
years of age). And they were overcome with great amazement. 43 He 
strictly charged them that no one should know this, and told them to give 
her something to eat. 
6
	1 He went away from there and came to his own country, and his 
disciples followed him. 2 And when the Sabbath had come, he began to 
teach in the synagogue. And many who heard him were astonished, 
saying, "Where did this man get these things? And what wisdom is this 
which is given to him, that such mighty works are performed by his 
hands! 3 Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James 
and Joses and Judas and Simon? Are not his sisters here with us?" And 
they took offense at him. 4 But Jesus said to them, "A prophet is not 
without honor except in his own country, among his own relatives, and in 
his own house." 5 Now he could do no mighty work there, except that he 
laid his hands on a few sick people and healed them. 6 And he marveled 
because of their unbelief. Then he went around the villages teaching. 
	7 And he called to him the twelve, and began to send them out 
two by two, and gave them authority over the unclean spirits. 8 He 
commanded them to take nothing for the journey except a staff—no bag, 
no bread, no money in their belts—9 but to wear sandals and not put on 
two tunics. 10 And he said to them, "Where you enter a house, stay there 
until you leave that place. 11 And if any place will not receive you and 
they refuse to hear you, when you leave, shake off the dust that is on your 
feet for a testimony against them." 12 So they went out and preached that 
people should repent. 13 And they cast out many demons, and anointed 
with oil many that were sick and healed them. 
	14 King Herod heard of it, for Jesus' name had become well 
known. Some said, "John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and 
that is why these powers are at work in him." 15 But others said, "It is 
Elijah." And others said, "It is a prophet, like one of the prophets of old." 
16 But when Herod heard, he said, "This is John, whom I beheaded; he 
has been raised from the dead!" 17 For Herod himself had sent and had 
John arrested, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his 
brother Philip's wife; because he had married her. 18 For John had said to 
Herod, "It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife." 19 And 
Herodias had a grudge against him, and wanted to kill him. But she could 
not, 20 for Herod feared John and protected him, knowing that he was a 
righteous and holy man. When he heard him, he was much perplexed; and 
yet he heard him gladly. 21 But an opportunity came when Herod on his 
birthday gave a banquet for his high officers and military commanders and 
the leading men of Galilee. 22 And when the daughter of Herodias came 
in and danced, she pleased Herod and his dinner guests. The king said to 
the girl, "Ask me for whatever you want, and I will give it to you." 23 And 
he vowed to her, "Whatever you ask me, I will give you, up to half of my 
kingdom." 24 So she went out and said to her mother, "What shall I ask?" 
And she said, "The head of John the Baptist!" 25 Immediately she came 
in with haste to the king and asked, saying, "I want you to give me at once 
the head of John the Baptist on a platter." 26 And the king was 
exceedingly sorry; but, because of his oaths and his guests, he did not 
want to refuse her. 27 And immediately the king sent an executioner and 
gave orders to bring his head. He went and beheaded him in the prison, 28 
and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the girl; and the girl gave 
it to her mother. 29 When his disciples heard of it, they came and took his 
body, and laid it in a tomb. 
	30 The apostles gathered to Jesus, and told him all that they had 
done and taught. 31 And he said to them, "Come away by yourselves to a 
lonely place and rest a while." For there were many coming and going, 
and they did not even have time to eat. 32 So they went away in the boat 
to a lonely place by themselves. 33 But many saw them going, and knew 
them, and they ran there on foot from all the towns, and got there ahead of 
them. 34 When Jesus went ashore he saw a great crowd, and he had 
compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. 
So he began to teach them many things. 35 When it was late in the day, 
his disciples came to him and said, "This is a deserted place, and already 
the hour is late. 36 Send them away, so they can go to the surrounding 
country and villages and buy themselves something to eat." 37 But he 
answered them, "You give them something to eat." And they said to him, 
"Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread, and give it to 
them to eat?" 38 But he said to them, "How many loaves do you have? Go 
and see." And when they found out they said, "Five, and two fish." 39 
Then he commanded them to make them all sit down in groups on the 
green grass. 40 So they sat down in groups, of hundreds and fifties. 41 
And taking the five loaves and the two fish he looked up to heaven, and 
blessed, and broke the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before 
the people; and he divided the two fish among them all. 42 And they all 
ate and were satisfied. 43 And they took up twelve baskets full of broken 
pieces and of the fish. 44 Now those who had eaten the loaves were about 
five thousand men. 
	45 Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go 
before him to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd. 
46 And after he had left them, he went up on the mountain to pray. 47 
When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he was 
alone on land. 48 And he saw the disciples straining at the oars, for the 
wind was against them. About the fourth watch of the night he came to 
them, walking on the sea. He was about to pass by them, 49 but when 
they saw him walking on the sea they thought it was a ghost, and cried 
out; 50 for they all saw him, and were terrified. But immediately he spoke 
to them and said, "Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid." 51 Then he 
climbed into the boat with them, and the wind ceased. And they were 
completely amazed, 52 for they had not understood about the loaves, 
because their hearts were hardened. 
	53 When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret 
and anchored there. 54 And when they got out of the boat, immediately 
the people recognized him, 55 and ran about that whole region, and began 
to carry those who were sick around on pallets to wherever they heard he 
was. 56 Wherever he entered, into villages, cities, or the country, they laid 
the sick in the marketplaces, and begged him that they might touch even 
the fringe of his garment. And as many as touched him were made well. 
7
	1 Now when the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had 
come from Jerusalem gathered together to him, 2 they saw some of his 
disciples eating food with hands that were defiled, that is, unwashed. 3 
(For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their 
hands in a special way, holding the tradition of the elders. 4 When they 
come from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they wash themselves. 
And there are many other traditions which they observe, the washing of 
cups and pitchers and copper vessels. ) 5 The Pharisees and the scribes 
asked him, "Why do your disciples not live according to the tradition of 
the elders, but eat with impure hands?" 6 And he said to them, "Well did 
Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites; as it is written: 
	'This people honors me with their lips, 
		but their heart is far from me. 
7	In vain they worship me, 
		teaching as doctrines the precepts of men.'
8 You let go of the commandment of God, and hold on to the tradition of 
men." 9 And he said to them, "You have a fine way of rejecting the 
commandment of God, in order to keep your tradition! 10 For Moses said, 
'Honor your father and your mother'; and, 'He who curses father or 
mother, let him be put to death.' 11 But you say that if a man says to his 
father or mother, 'Whatever help you might otherwise have received from 
me is Corban' (that is, a gift devoted to God), 12 then you no longer let 
him do anything for his father or mother, 13 thus making void the word of 
God through your tradition which you have handed down. And many such 
things you do."
	14 And he called all the people to him again, and said to them, 
"Hear me, everyone, and understand: 15 there is nothing outside a man 
which by going into him can defile him; but the things which come out of 
a man are what defile him." 17 When he had left the crowd and entered 
the house, his disciples asked him about this parable. 18 So he said to 
them, "Are you also without understanding? Do you not see that whatever 
enters a man from outside cannot defile him, 19 since it does not enter his 
heart but his stomach, and so passes on?" (Thus he declared all foods 
clean.) 20 And he said, "What comes out of a man is what defiles a man. 
21 For from within, out of the heart of men, come evil thoughts, 
fornications, theft, murder, adultery, 22 coveting, wickedness, deceit, 
lewdness, envy, slander, pride, foolishness. 23 All these evil things come 
from within, and they defile a man."
	24 From there he arose and went away to the region of Tyre and 
Sidon. And he entered a house, and did not want anyone to know it; yet 
he could not be hidden. 25 But a woman whose little daughter was 
possessed by an unclean spirit heard about him, and she came and fell at 
his feet. 26 Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by birth. And 
she begged him to cast the demon out of her daughter. 27 And he said to 
her, "Let the children first be fed, for it is not right to take the children's 
bread and throw it to the dogs." 28 But she answered him, "Yes, Lord, yet 
even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs." 29 Then he said 
to her, "For this saying you may go your way; the demon has left your 
daughter." 30 She went home, and found her child lying on the bed, and 
the demon gone. 
	31 Then he departed from the region of Tyre, and went through 
Sidon to the Sea of Galilee, through the region of the Decapolis. 32 Then 
they brought to him a man who was deaf and had an impediment in his 
speech, and they begged him to put his hand on him. 33 And he took him 
aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spat and 
touched his tongue. 34 And looking up to heaven he sighed and said to 
him, "Ephphatha," that is, "Be opened." 35 And [immediately] his ears 
were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke 
plainly. 36 And he commanded them to tell no one; but the more he 
charged them, the more widely they proclaimed it. 37 And they were 
astonished beyond measure, saying, "He has done all things well. He even 
makes the deaf to hear and the mute to speak."
8
	1 In those days, when again a great crowd had gathered, and they 
had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him, and said to them, 2 "I 
have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me 
three days and have nothing to eat. 3 And if I send them away hungry to 
their homes, they will faint on the way; and some of them have come a 
long distance." 4 And his disciples answered him, "How can one feed 
these men with bread here in the desert?" 5 And he asked them, "How 
many loaves do you have?" They said, "Seven." 6 So he commanded the 
crowd to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven loaves, and 
having given thanks he broke them and gave them to his disciples to set 
before the people; and they set them before the crowd. 7 They also had a 
few small fish; and having blessed them, he commanded that these also 
should be set before them. 8 They ate, and were satisfied; and they took 
up seven baskets full of the broken pieces left over. 9 About four 
thousand men were present. And having sent them away, 10 he 
immediately got into the boat with his disciples, and went to the region of 
Dalmanutha. 
	11 The Pharisees came and began to argue with him, seeking 
from him a sign from heaven, to test him. 12 And he sighed deeply in his 
spirit, and said, "Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly, I say to 
you, no sign shall be given to this generation." 13 And he left them, and 
getting into the boat again he departed to the other side. 
	14 Now the disciples had forgotten to bring bread, and they had 
only one loaf with them in the boat. 15 And he cautioned them, saying, 
"Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of 
Herod." 16 And they discussed it with one another, saying, "It is because 
we have no bread." 17 Being aware of it, Jesus said to them, "Why do you 
discuss the fact that you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive or 
understand? Are your hearts hardened? 18 Having eyes do you not see, 
and having ears do you not hear? And do you not remember? 19 When I 
broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of 
broken pieces did you take up?" They said to him, "Twelve." 20 "And 
when I broke the seven for the four thousand, how many large baskets full 
of pieces did you take up?" And they said, "Seven." 21 He said to them, 
"Do you not yet understand?"
	22 And they came to Bethsaida; and some people brought a 
blind man to him, and begged him to touch him. 23 So he took the blind 
man by the hand and led him out of the village. And when he had spit on 
his eyes and put his hands on him, he asked him "Do you see anything?" 
24 And he looked up and said, "I see men; but they look like trees, 
walking." 25 Then he put his hands on his eyes again and made him look 
up. And he was restored, and saw everything clearly. 26 And he sent him 
away to his home, saying, "Do not even go into the village." 
	27 And Jesus went on with his disciples, to the villages of 
Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he asked his disciples, "Who do men 
say that I am?" 28 They replied, "Some say John the Baptist; others say 
Elijah; and still others, one of the prophets." 29 And he asked them, "But 
who do you say that I am?" Peter answered him, "You are the Christ." 30 
And he charged them to tell no one about him. 
	31 And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer 
many things, and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the 
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 32 He spoke plainly 
about this. And Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. 33 But 
when he had turned around and looked at his disciples, he rebuked Peter, 
and said, "Get behind me, Satan! For you are not mindful of the things of 
God, but the things of men." 34 And he called to him the multitude with 
his disciples, and said to them, "If anyone would come after me, let him 
deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. 35 For whoever desires 
to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and the 
gospel's will save it. 36 For what does it profit a man to gain the whole 
world, and forfeit his soul? 37 Or what can a man give in exchange for his 
soul? 38 For whoever is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous 
and sinful generation, of him the Son of Man will also be ashamed when 
he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels." 
9
	1 And he said to them, "Truly, I say to you that there are some 
standing here who will not taste death before they see the kingdom of 
God come with power." 2 After six days Jesus took with him Peter and 
James and John, and led them up a high mountain apart by themselves. 
And he was transfigured before them, 3 and his clothes became dazzling, 
exceedingly white, as no launderer on earth could bleach them. 4 And 
there appeared to them Elijah with Moses, and they were talking with 
Jesus. 5 And Peter said to Jesus, "Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. And 
let us make three tabernacles—one for you, one for Moses, and one for 
Elijah." 6 For he did not know what to say, for they were greatly afraid. 7 
And a cloud came and overshadowed them; and a voice came out of the 
cloud, "This is my beloved Son. Listen to him!" 8 Suddenly, when they 
looked around, they no longer saw anyone with them but Jesus only. 
	9 And as they were coming down the mountain, he charged them 
to tell no one what they had seen, until the Son of Man had risen from the 
dead. 10 So they kept the matter to themselves, questioning what the 
rising from the dead meant. 11 And they asked him, "Why do the scribes 
say that Elijah must come first?" 12 Then he said to them, "Elijah does 
come first and restores all things. And how is it written of the Son of 
Man, that he must suffer many things and be treated with contempt? 13 
But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they did to him whatever they 
wished, as it is written of him."
	14 And when they came to the disciples, they saw a great crowd 
around them, and scribes arguing with them. 15 Immediately, when they 
saw him, all the people were greatly amazed, and ran to him and greeted 
him. 16 And he asked them, "What are you discussing with them?" 17 
And one of the crowd answered him, "Teacher, I brought my son to you, 
who has a mute spirit. 18 And wherever it seizes him, it throws him down; 
he foams at the mouth, gnashes his teeth and becomes rigid. I asked your 
disciples to cast out the spirit, but they could not." 19 He answered him, 
"O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I 
bear with you? Bring him to me." 20 And they brought the boy to him. 
And when the spirit saw him, immediately it convulsed the boy, and he 
fell on the ground and rolled about, foaming at the mouth. 21 And Jesus 
asked his father, "How long has he been like this?" And he said, "From 
childhood. 22 And it has often thrown him both into the fire and into the 
water to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have pity on us and help 
us." 23 Jesus said to him, "If you can, all things are possible to him who 
believes." 24 Immediately the father of the child cried out and said, "I 
believe; help my unbelief!" 25 And when Jesus saw that a crowd came 
running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, "You dumb 
and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and never enter him 
again." 26 And the spirit cried out, convulsed him terribly, and came out. 
And the boy was like a corpse; so that many of them said, "He is dead." 
27 But Jesus took him by the hand and lifted him up, and he arose. 28 
And when he had come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, 
"Why could we not cast it out?" 29 And he said to them, "This kind can 
only come out by prayer."
	30 Then they departed from there and passed through Galilee, 
and he did not want anyone to know it. 31 For he was teaching his 
disciples and said to them, "The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into 
the hands of men. They will kill him, and when he is killed, after three 
days he will rise." 32 But they did not understand the saying, and they 
were afraid to ask him. 
	33 And they came to Capernaum. When he was in the house, he 
asked them, "What were you discussing on the road?" 34 But they kept 
silent; for on the way they had discussed with one another who was the 
greatest. 35 And he sat down, called the twelve, and said to them, "If 
anyone desires to be first, he must be last of all and servant of all." 36 
And he took a little child, and put him in the midst of them. And taking 
him in his arms, he said to them, 37 "Whoever receives one of these little 
children in my name receives me; and whoever receives me, receives not 
me but him who sent me."
	38 John said to him, "Teacher, we saw a man casting out demons 
in your name and we forbade him, because he was not one of us." 39 But 
Jesus said, "Do not forbid him, for no one who does a miracle in my name 
can soon afterward speak evil of me. 40 For he who is not against us is 
for us. 41 For truly, I say to you, whoever gives you a cup of water to 
drink in my name, because you belong to Christ, will by no means lose 
his reward. 
	42 "Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to 
sin, it would be better for him if a great millstone were hung round his 
neck and he were thrown into the sea. 43 If your hand causes you to sin, 
cut it off. It is better for you to enter life maimed than with two hands to 
go into hell, to the fire that shall never be quenched. 45 And if your foot 
causes you to sin, cut it off; it is better for you to enter life lame than with 
two feet to be thrown into hell. 47 And if your eye causes you to sin, 
pluck it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye 
than to have two eyes and be thrown into hell, 48 where 'their worm does 
not die, and the fire is not quenched.' 49 For every one will be salted with 
fire. 50 Salt is good, but if the salt loses its flavor, how will you season 
it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another."
10
	1 Then he left there and went to the region of Judea and beyond 
the Jordan. And crowds gathered to him again; and again, as his custom 
was, he taught them. 2 The Pharisees came and in order to test him asked, 
"Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?" 3 He answered them, "What 
did Moses command you?" 4 They said, "Moses permitted a man to write 
a certificate of divorce, and to put her away." 5 But Jesus said to them, 
"Because of your hardness of heart he wrote you this commandment. 6 
But from the beginning of creation God 'made them male and female.' 7 
'For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to 
his wife, 8 and the two shall become one flesh.' So they are no longer 
two, but one flesh. 9 Therefore what God has joined together, let not man 
separate." 10 In the house his disciples also asked him again about this 
matter. 11 So he said to them, "Whoever divorces his wife and marries 
another commits adultery against her. 12 And if she divorces her husband 
and marries another man, she commits adultery."
	13 And they were bringing children to him, that he might touch 
them; but the disciples rebuked them. 14 But when Jesus saw it, he was 
indignant and said to them, "Let the little children come to me; and do not 
hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of God. 15 Truly, I say to 
you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will 
not enter it." 16 And he took them in his arms, put his hands on them and 
blessed them. 
	17 And as he was setting out on his journey, a man ran up and 
knelt before him, and asked him, "Good Teacher, what must I do to 
inherit eternal life?" 18 And Jesus said to him, "Why do you call me 
good? No one is good but God alone. 19 You know the commandments: 
'Do not murder, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false 
witness, Do not defraud, Honor your father and mother.'" 20 And he said 
to him, "Teacher, all these I have observed from my youth." 21 Then 
Jesus, looking at him, loved him, and said to him, "You lack one thing; 
go and sell what you have, and give to the poor, and you will have 
treasure in heaven; and come, follow me." 22 But he fell sad at this word, 
and went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. 
	23 Then Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, "How 
hard it is for those who have riches to enter the kingdom of God!" 24 And 
the disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus said to them again, 
"Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God! 25 It is easier for a 
camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the 
kingdom of God." 26 And they were exceedingly astonished, and said to 
him, "Then who can be saved?" 27 Jesus looked at them and said, "With 
men it is impossible, but not with God; for all things are possible with 
God." 28 Peter began to say to him, "See, we have left everything and 
followed you." 29 Jesus said, "Truly, I say to you, there is no one who 
has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or 
lands, for my sake and for the gospel, 30 who will not receive a 
hundredfold now in this time—house and brothers and sisters and 
mothers and children and lands, with persecutions, and in the age to 
come, eternal life. 31 But many who are first will be last, and the last 
first."
	32 They were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was 
walking ahead of them; and they were amazed, and those who followed 
were afraid. And he took the twelve aside again and began to tell them 
what was to happen to him. 33 "Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem; 
and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and the scribes, 
and they will condemn him to death, and deliver him to the Gentiles; 34 
and they will mock him, and spit on him, and scourge him, and kill him. 
And after three days he will rise."
	35 Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to him and 
said, "Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask." 36 And he 
said to them, "What do you want me to do for you?" 37 And they said to 
him, "Grant us to sit, one at your right hand and the other at your left, in 
your glory." 38 But Jesus said to them, "You do not know what you are 
asking. Can you drink the cup that I drink, or be baptized with the 
baptism I am baptized with?" 39 They said to him, "We are able." So 
Jesus said to them, "You will indeed drink the cup that I drink, and with 
the baptism I am baptized with you will be baptized; 40 but to sit at my 
right hand or at my left is not mine to grant, but it is for those for whom it 
has been prepared." 41 And when the ten heard it, they began to be 
indignant with James and John. 42 But Jesus called them to himself and 
said to them, "You know that those who are considered rulers over the 
Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over 
them. 43 But it shall not be so among you. But whoever wants to become 
great among you must be your servant, 44 and whoever wants to be first 
among you must be slave of all. 45 For even the Son of Man did not come 
to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."
	46 And they came to Jericho. And as he was leaving Jericho with 
his disciples and a great multitude, Bartimaeus, a blind man, the son of 
Timaeus, was sitting by the roadside begging. 47 And when he heard that 
it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say, "Jesus, Son of 
David, have mercy on me!" 48 Many rebuked him and told him to be 
quiet, but he cried out all the more, "Son of David, have mercy on me!" 
49 So Jesus stopped and said, "Call him." And they called the blind man, 
saying to him, "Take heart; rise, he is calling you." 50 And throwing aside 
his garment, he rose and came to Jesus. 51 And Jesus said to him, "What 
do you want me to do for you?" And the blind man said to him, "Master, 
let me receive my sight." 52 Then Jesus said to him, "Go your way; your 
faith has made you well." And immediately he received his sight and 
followed Jesus on the road. 
11
	1 And when they drew near Jerusalem, to Bethphage and 
Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, 2 and said 
to them, "Go into the village opposite you, and immediately as you enter 
it you will find a colt tied, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and 
bring it. 3 If anyone says to you, 'Why are you doing this?' say, 'The 
Lord has need of it and will send it back here immediately.'" 4 They went 
away and found a colt tied at the door outside in the open street, and they 
untied it. 5 And some of those who stood there said to them, "What are 
you doing, untying the colt?" 6 They answered as Jesus had told them to, 
and they let them go. 7 Then they brought the colt to Jesus and threw 
their garments on it, and he sat on it. 8 And many spread their garments 
on the road, and others spread leafy branches which they had cut from the 
fields. 9 And those who went before and those who followed cried out, 
	"Hosanna! 
	Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! 
10	Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming! 
	Hosanna in the highest!"
11 Jesus entered Jerusalem, and went into the temple. And when he had 
looked round at everything, as it was already late, he went out to Bethany 
with the twelve. 
	12 On the next day, when they came from Bethany, he was 
hungry. 13 And seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, he went to see if 
he could find anything on it. When he came to it, he found nothing but 
leaves, for it was not the season for figs. 14 And he said to it, "May no 
one ever eat fruit from you again." And his disciples heard it. 
	15 So they came to Jerusalem. And Jesus entered the temple and 
began to drive out those who bought and sold in the temple, and 
overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those who 
sold doves. 16 And he would not allow anyone to carry merchandise 
through the temple. 17 And as he taught them, he said, "Is it not written, 
	'My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations'? 
		But you have made it a den of robbers." 
18 And the chief priests and the scribes heard it and sought a way to 
destroy him; for they feared him, because all the multitude was astonished 
at his teaching. 19 When evening came, they went out of the city. 
	20 In the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree 
withered from the roots. 21 Peter remembered and said to him, "Rabbi, 
look! The fig tree which you cursed has withered." 22 And Jesus 
answered them, "Have faith in God. 23 Truly, I say to you, whoever says 
to this mountain, 'Be taken up and cast into the sea,' and does not doubt 
in his heart, but believes that what he says will come to pass, it will be 
done for him. 24 Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, 
believe that you have received it, and it will be yours. 25 And whenever 
you stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive him, so 
that your Father in heaven may also forgive you your trespasses. 
	27 Then they came again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in 
the temple, the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders came to him. 28 
And they said to him, "By what authority are you doing these things? 
Who gave you this authority to do them?" 29 Jesus said to them, "I will 
ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I 
do these things. 30 The baptism of John—was it from heaven or from 
men? Answer me." 31 And they reasoned among themselves, "If we say, 
'From heaven,' He will say, 'Why then did you not believe him?' 32 But 
if we say, 'From men'"—they feared the people, for all held that John was 
a real prophet. 33 So they answered Jesus, "We do not know." And Jesus 
said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things."
12
	1 Then he began to speak to them in parables: "A man planted a 
vineyard and set a hedge around it, dug a place for the wine vat and built a 
tower. And he leased it to vine dressers and went into a far country. 2 At 
harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants, to collect from them some of 
the fruit of the vineyard. 3 And they took him and beat him, and sent him 
away empty-handed. 4 Again he sent to them another servant, and they 
wounded him in the head, and treated him shamefully. 5 And he sent 
another, and him they killed; and so with many others, some they beat and 
some they killed. 6 He still had one left to send, a beloved son.  He sent 
him to them last, saying, 'They will respect my son.' 7 But those tenants 
said to one another, 'This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the 
inheritance will be ours.' 8 So they took him and killed him, and cast him 
out of the vineyard. 9 What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will 
come and destroy the tenants, and give the vineyard to others. 10 Have 
you not read this Scripture: 
	'The stone which the builders rejected 
		has become the chief cornerstone; 
11	this was the Lord's doing, 
		and it is marvelous in our eyes'?" 
12 And they sought to arrest him, but feared the multitude, for they knew 
he had spoken the parable against them. So they left him and went away. 
	13 Then they sent to him some of the Pharisees and the 
Herodians, to catch him in his words. 14 When they came, they said to 
him, "Teacher, we know that you are true, and care about no man; for you 
do not regard the person of men, but teach the way of God in truth. Is it 
lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not? 15 Should we pay them, or should 
we not?" But knowing their hypocrisy, he said to them, "Why do you put 
me to the test? Bring me a denarius, and let me look at it." 16 And they 
brought one. And he said to them, "Whose likeness and inscription is 
this?" They said to him, "Caesar's." 17 Jesus said to them, "Render to 
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's." 
And they were amazed at him. 
	18 Then some Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came 
to him; and they asked him a question, saying: 19 "Teacher, Moses wrote 
for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife, but leaves no child, 
the man must take the wife, and raise up children for his brother. 20 Now 
there were seven brothers; the first took a wife, and when he died left no 
children. 21 And the second took her, and he died; leaving behind no 
children. And the third likewise. 22 So the seven had her and left no 
children. Last of all the woman died also. 23 In the resurrection, whose 
wife will she be? For the seven had her as wife." 24 Jesus said to them, 
"Is not this why you are wrong, that you do not know the Scriptures nor 
the power of God? 25 For when they rise from the dead, they neither 
marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. 26 And as 
for the dead being raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the 
passage about the bush, how God said to him, 'I am the God of Abraham, 
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob'? 27 He is not the God of the 
dead, but of the living; you are greatly mistaken."
	28 And one of the scribes came up and heard them disputing 
with one another, and seeing that he had answered them well, asked him, 
"Which commandment is the first of all?" 29 Jesus answered, "The first 
is: 'Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 30 And you shall love 
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all 
your mind, and with all your strength.' 31 The second is this: 'You shall 
love your neighbor as yourself.' There is no other commandment greater 
than these." 32 And the scribe said to him, "You are right, Teacher; you 
have well said that God is one, and there is no other but he; 33 and to 
love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all 
the strength, and to love one's neighbor as oneself, is much more than all 
whole burnt offerings and sacrifices." 34 And when Jesus saw that he 
answered wisely, he said to him, "You are not far from the kingdom of 
God." And after that no one dared to ask him any question. 
	35 And Jesus said, while he taught in the temple, "How is it that 
the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David? 36 David himself, 
speaking by the Holy Spirit, declared: 
	'The Lord said to my Lord: 
	"Sit at my right hand 
		till I put your enemies under your feet."'
37 Therefore David himself calls him 'Lord'; how is he then his son?" 
And the common people heard him gladly. 
	38 And in his teaching he said, "Beware of the scribes, who like 
to go around in long robes, and to have salutations in the market places 
39 and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at feasts, 
40 who devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. 
They will receive the greater condemnation."
	41 And Jesus sat down opposite the treasury, and watched the 
multitude putting money into the treasury. Many people who were rich 
put in large sums. 42 And a poor widow came, and put in two copper 
coins, which make a penny. 43 And he called his disciples to him, and 
said to them, "Truly, I say to you, this poor widow has put in more than 
all those who are contributing to the treasury. 44 For they all put in out of 
their abundance, but she out of her poverty put in everything—all she had 
to live on."
13
	1 And as he came out of the temple, one of his disciples said to 
him, "Look, Teacher, what wonderful stones and what wonderful 
buildings!" 2 And Jesus said to him, "Do you see all these great 
buildings? There will not be left here one stone upon another, that will 
not be thrown down."
	3 Now as he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, 
Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, 4 "Tell us, when will 
this be? And what will be the sign when these things are all to be 
fulfilled?" 5 And Jesus began to say to them: "Take heed that no one 
deceives you. 6 Many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and will 
deceive many. 7 When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be 
alarmed; such things must happen, but the end is not yet. 8 For nation 
will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. And there will be 
earthquakes in various places, and there will be famines and troubles. 
These are the beginning of birth pains. 9 But watch out for yourselves, for 
they will deliver you up to councils, and you will be beaten in the 
synagogues. You will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, 
for a testimony to them. 10 And the gospel must first be preached to all 
nations. 11 And when they bring you to trial and deliver you up, do not 
worry beforehand what you are to say. But say whatever is given you in 
that hour; for it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit. 12 Brother will 
betray brother to death, and a father his child; and children will rise up 
against parents and have them put to death. 13 And you will be hated by 
all men for my name's sake. But he who endures to the end will be saved. 
	14 "When you see 'the abomination of desolation' standing 
where it ought not to be (let the reader understand), then let those who are 
in Judea flee to the mountains. 15 Let him who is on the housetop not go 
down into the house, nor enter to take anything out of his house. 16 And 
let him who is in the field not go back to get his cloak. 17 But woe for 
those who are pregnant and those who are nursing babies in those days! 
18 Pray that it may not happen in winter. 19 For in those days there will 
be tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the creation 
which God created until now, and never will be. 20 And if the Lord had 
not shortened those days, no flesh would be saved; but for the sake of the 
elect, whom he chose, he shortened the days. 21 Then if anyone says to 
you, 'Look, here is the Christ!' or, 'Look, he is there!' do not believe it. 
22 For false christs and false prophets will rise and show signs and 
wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect. 23 But take heed; see, I 
have told you all things beforehand. 
	24 "But in those days, after that tribulation, 
	the sun will be darkened, 
		and the moon will not give its light; 
25	the stars will fall from heaven, 
		and the powers in the heavens will be shaken. 
26 Then they will see the Son of Man coming in the clouds with great 
power and glory. 27 And then he will send out his angels, and gather his 
elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of 
heaven. 
	28 "Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: as soon as its branch 
becomes tender and puts forth its leaves, you know that summer is near. 
29 So also, when you see these things happening, you know that it is 
near, right at the door. 30 Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass 
away before all these things take place. 31 Heaven and earth will pass 
away, but my words will not pass away. 
	32 "But of that day or that hour no one knows, not even the 
angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. 33 Take heed, watch; 
for you do not know when the time will come. 34 It is like a man going on 
a journey, when he leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each 
with his work, and commands the doorkeeper to be on the watch. 35 
Watch therefore—for you do not know when the master of the house will 
come, in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or in the 
morning—36 lest, coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. 37 And what I 
say to you, I say to all: Watch!"
14
	1 It was now two days before the Passover and the feast of 
Unleavened Bread. And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking 
how to arrest him by stealth, and kill him. 2 But they said, "Not during 
the feast, lest there be an uproar of the people."
	3 And while he was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, 
as he sat at table, a woman came with an alabaster flask of ointment of 
pure nard, very costly. And she broke the flask and poured it over his 
head. 4 But there were some who said to themselves indignantly, "Why 
was this ointment wasted? 5 For it might have been sold for more than 
three hundred denarii and given to the poor." And they criticized her 
sharply. 6 But Jesus said, "Let her alone. Why do you trouble her? She 
has done a beautiful thing to me. 7 For you always have the poor with 
you, and whenever you will, you can do good to them; but you will not 
always have me. 8 She has done what she could. She has come 
beforehand to anoint my body for burial. 9 And truly, I say to you, 
wherever the gospel is preached in the whole world, what she has done 
will also be told in memory of her."
	10 Then Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief 
priests to betray him to them. 11 And when they heard it they were glad, 
and promised to give him money. So he sought an opportunity to betray 
him. 
	12 Now on the first day of Unleavened Bread, when they killed 
the Passover lamb, his disciples said to him, "Where do you want us to go 
and prepare for you to eat the Passover?" 13 And he sent two of his 
disciples, and said to them, "Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of 
water will meet you; follow him. 14 And wherever he enters, say to the 
owner of the house, 'The Teacher says, where is my guest room, where I 
may eat the Passover with my disciples?' 15 He will show you a large 
upper room, furnished and ready; make preparations for us there." 16 So 
the disciples set out and went to the city, and found it just as he had told 
them; and they prepared the Passover. 17 And when it was evening he 
came with the twelve. 18 And as they were at table eating, Jesus said, 
"Truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me, one who is eating with 
me." 19 They began to be sorrowful, and to say to him one by one, "Is it 
I?" 20 He said to them, "It is one of the twelve, one who dips bread into 
the dish with me. 21 For the Son of Man goes just as it is written of him, 
but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have 
been better for that man if he had not been born."
	22 And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, blessed and broke 
it, and gave it to them and said, "Take; this is my body." 23 Then he took 
the cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, and they all 
drank from it. 24 And he said to them, "This is my blood of the covenant, 
which is poured out for many. 25 Truly, I say to you, I will not drink of 
the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of 
God." 26 And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of 
Olives. 
	27 And Jesus said to them, "You will all fall away; for it is 
written: 
	'I will strike the shepherd, 
		and the sheep will be scattered.' 
28 But after I have been raised, I will go before you to Galilee." 29 Peter 
said to him, "Even if all fall away, I will not." 30 Jesus said to him, 
"Truly, I say to you that this very night, before the rooster crows twice, 
you will deny me three times." 31 But he spoke more vehemently, "If I 
have to die with you, I will not deny you!" And they all said the same. 
	32 They went to a place which was called Gethsemane; and he 
said to his disciples, "Sit here, while I pray." 33 And he took Peter, James 
and John with him, and he began to be deeply distressed and troubled. 34 
And he said to them, "My soul is very sorrowful, even to death; stay here, 
and watch." 35 And going a little farther, he fell on the ground and prayed 
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. 36 And he said, 
"Abba, Father, all things are possible for you. Take this cup away from 
me; yet not what I will, but what you will." 37 Then he came and found 
them sleeping, and he said to Peter, "Simon, are you asleep? Could you 
not watch one hour? 38 Watch and pray that you may not enter into 
temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." 39 And 
again he went away and prayed, saying the same words. 40 And when he 
came again, he found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy; and they 
did not know what to answer him. 41 Then he came the third time and 
said to them, "Are you still sleeping and resting? It is enough! The hour 
has come; behold, the Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of 
sinners. 42 Rise, let us go; see, my betrayer is at hand."
	43 And immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas came, 
one of the twelve, and with him a crowd with swords and clubs, from the 
chief priests and the scribes and the elders. 44 Now the betrayer had given 
them a signal, saying, "The one I shall kiss is the man; seize him and lead 
him away under guard." 45 And when he came, he went up to him at once, 
and said, "Rabbi!" and he kissed him. 46 And they laid hands on him and 
seized him. 47 And one of those who stood by drew his sword and struck 
the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear. 48 And Jesus said to 
them, "Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs to 
capture me? 49 Every day I was with you in the temple teaching, and you 
did not seize me. But the scriptures must be fulfilled." 50 Then they all 
forsook him and fled. 
	51 And a young man followed him, with nothing but a linen 
cloth around his body. And they seized him, 52 and he left the linen cloth 
and fled from them naked. 
	53 And they led Jesus to the high priest; and all the chief priests 
and the elders and the scribes were assembled. 54 But Peter followed him 
at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest. And he sat with 
the guards and warmed himself at the fire. 55 Now the chief priests and 
the whole council sought testimony against Jesus to put him to death, but 
they found none. 56 For many bore false witness against him, but their 
testimonies did not agree. 57 Then some stood up and bore false witness 
against him, saying, 58 "We heard him say, 'I will destroy this temple that 
is made with hands, and in three days I will build another not made with 
hands.'" 59 Yet even then their testimony did not agree. 60 And the high 
priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, "Have you no answer to 
make? What is it that these men testify against you?" 61 But he was silent 
and made no answer. Again the high priest asked him, "Are you the 
Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" 62 And Jesus said, "I am. 
	And you will see the Son of Man 
		sitting at the right hand of the Power, 
		and coming with the clouds of heaven." 
63 The high priest tore his clothes and said, "Why do we need any more 
witnesses? 64 You have heard the blasphemy. What do you think?" And 
they all condemned him as worthy of death. 65 Then some began to spit 
on him, and to blindfold him, and to beat him, and to say to him, 
"Prophesy!" And the guards received him with slaps in the face. 
	66 Now as Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant 
girls of the high priest came. 67 And when she saw Peter warming 
himself, she looked at him, and said, "You also were with the Nazarene, 
Jesus." 68 But he denied it, saying, "I neither know nor understand what 
you mean." And he went out into the gateway. 69 And the servant girl saw 
him again, and began to say to those who stood by, "This is one of them." 
70 But again he denied it. And after a little while again those standing 
near said to Peter, "Surely you are one of them; for you are a Gallilean." 
71 But he began to invoke a curse on himself and to swear, "I do not 
know this man of whom you speak." 72 And immediately the rooster 
crowed a second time. Then Peter remembered the word Jesus had said to 
him, "Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times." And 
he broke down and wept. 
15
	1 Very early in the morning, the chief priests held a consultation 
with the elders and scribes and the whole council; and they bound Jesus, 
led him away, and delivered him to Pilate. 2 Then Pilate asked him, "Are 
you the King of the Jews?" And he answered him, "It is as you say." 3 
And the chief priests accused him of many things. 4 And Pilate again 
asked him, "Have you no answer to make? See how many things they 
bring against you." 5 But Jesus still made no answer, so that Pilate was 
amazed. 
	6 Now at the feast he was accustomed to release for them one 
prisoner whom they requested. 7 And with the rebels in prison, who had 
committed murder in the insurrection, there was a man called Barabbas. 8 
And the crowd came up and began to ask Pilate to do as he had always 
done for them. 9 But Pilate answered them, "Do you want me to release to 
you the King of the Jews?" 10 For he knew it was out of envy that the 
chief priests had handed Jesus over to him. 11 But the chief priests stirred 
up the crowd to have him release for them Barabbas instead. 12 And 
Pilate again said to them, "Then what shall I do with the man whom you 
call the King of the Jews?" 13 And they cried out again, "Crucify him!" 
14 And Pilate said to them, "Why, what evil has he done?" But they 
shouted all the more, "Crucify him!" 15 So Pilate, wanting to satisfy the 
crowd, released Barabbas to them; and he delivered Jesus, after he had 
scourged him, to be crucified. 
	16 The soldiers led him away into the palace (that is, the 
Praetorium) and they called together the whole battalion. 17 And they 
clothed him in a purple cloak, and they twisted a crown of thorns and put 
it on him. 18 And they began to salute him, "Hail, King of the Jews!" 19 
Then they struck him on the head with a reed and spat on him; and falling 
on their knees, they paid homage to him. 20 And when they had mocked 
him, they took the purple robe off him, and put his own clothes on him. 
Then they led him out to crucify him. 
	21 Then they compelled a certain man, Simon of Cyrene, the 
father of Alexander and Rufus, as he was coming out of the country and 
passing by, to carry his cross. 22 And they brought him to the place called 
Golgotha (which means the place of a skull). 23 Then they offered him 
wine mingled with myrrh, but he did not take it. 24 And when they 
crucified him, 
	they divided his garments, 
		casting lots for them 
			to determine what each man should take. 
25 And it was the third hour, when they crucified him. 26 And the 
inscription of the charge written against him read: 

THE KING OF THE JEWS. 

27 And with him they crucified two robbers, one on his right and one on 
his left. 29 And those who passed by hurled insults at him, wagging their 
heads, and saying, "Aha! You who would destroy the temple and build it 
in three days, 30 save yourself, and come down from the cross!" 31 So 
also the chief priests mocked him among themselves with the scribes, and 
said, "He saved others; he cannot save himself. 32 Let the Christ, the 
King of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and 
believe." Those who were crucified with him also reviled him. 
	33 And when the sixth hour had come, there was darkness over 
the whole land until the ninth hour. 34 And at the ninth hour Jesus cried 
out with a loud voice, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?"—which means, 
"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" 35 When some of those 
standing near heard this, they said, "Behold, he is calling Elijah." 36 And 
one ran and filled a sponge full of wine vinegar, put it on a reed, and 
offered it to him to drink, saying, "Wait, let us see if Elijah will come to 
take him down." 37 And with a loud cry, Jesus breathed his last. 38 Then 
the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. 39 So when the 
centurion, who stood opposite him, saw that he cried out like this and 
breathed his last, he said, "Truly this man was the Son of God!" 40 There 
were also women looking on from afar, among whom were Mary 
Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and 
Salome, 41 who also followed him and ministered to him when he was in 
Galilee; and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
	42 Now when evening had come, because it was the Preparation 
Day, that is, the day before the Sabbath, 43 Joseph of Arimathea, a 
prominent council member, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of 
God, coming and taking courage, went in to Pilate and asked for the body 
of Jesus. 44 Pilate marveled that he was already dead; and summoning the 
centurion, he asked him if he was already dead. 45 And when he learned 
from the centurion that he was dead, he granted the body to Joseph. 46 
Then he bought fine linen, took him down, and wrapped him in the linen. 
And he laid him in a tomb which had been hewn out of the rock, and 
rolled a stone against the door of the tomb. 47 Mary Magdalene and Mary 
the mother of Joses saw where he was laid. 
16
	1 Now when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, Mary the 
mother of James, and Salome bought spices, so that they might go and 
anoint him. 2 And very early on the first day of the week, they came to the 
tomb when the sun had risen. 3 And they asked each other, "Who will roll 
away the stone from the door of the tomb for us?" 4 But when they 
looked up, they saw that the stone, though it was very large, had been 
rolled away. 5 And entering the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on 
the right side, dressed in a white robe; and they were alarmed. 6 But he 
said to them, "Do not be alarmed. You seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was 
crucified. He has risen! He is not here. See the place where they laid him. 
7 But go, tell his disciples and Peter that he is going before you to 
Galilee; there you will see him, as he told you." 8 So they went out 
quickly and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had 
gripped them. And they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid. 
	9 Now when he rose early on the first day of the week, he 
appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven 
demons. 10 She went and told those who had been with him, as they 
mourned and wept. 11 And when they heard that he was alive and had 
been seen by her, they did not believe it. 
	12 After this he appeared in another form to two of them, as they 
were walking into the country. 13 And they went and told it to the rest, 
but they did not believe them either. 
	14 Later he appeared to the eleven as they sat at the table; and he 
rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they did 
not believe those who had seen him after he had risen. 15 And he said to 
them, "Go into all the world and preach the gospel to all creation. 16 He 
who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who does not believe 
will be condemned. 17 And these signs will accompany those who 
believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak in new 
tongues; 18 they will pick up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, 
it will not hurt them; they will lay their hands on the sick, and they will 
recover." 
	19 So then the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was 
taken up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God. 20 Then they 
went out and preached everywhere, and the Lord worked with them and 
confirmed the word by the signs that accompanied it. Amen. 





Mark, page 1

